<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Michael Angelo Buonarroti by Charles Holroyd




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Michael Angelo Buonarroti

Author:  Charles Holroyd

Release Date: September 19, 2005 [Ebook #19332]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
 <fileDesc>
 <titleStmt>
 <title>Michael Angelo Buonarroti</title>
 <author>Charles Holroyd</author>
 </titleStmt>
 <editionStmt>
  <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
 </editionStmt>
 <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2006-09-19">September 19, 2006</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">19332</idno>
 <idno type='DPid'>projectID424586684ea3d</idno>
 <availability>
 <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
 with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
 away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
 License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
 </publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>Michael Angelo Buonarroti</title>
  <author>Charles Holroyd</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>London</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Duckworth and Company</publisher>
   <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Charles Scribner's Sons</publisher>
   <date>1903</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>
 </fileDesc>

 <encodingDesc>
 <classDecl>
  <taxonomy id="lc">
  <bibl>
   <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
  </bibl>
  </taxonomy>
 </classDecl>
 </encodingDesc>
 <profileDesc>
 <langUsage>
  <language id="en">English</language>
 </langUsage>
 <textClass>
  <classCode scheme="lc">
  *** <!-- LoC Class (PR, PQ, ...) -->
  </classCode>
  <keywords>
  <list>
   <!-- <item></item> any keywords for PG search engine -->
  </list>
  </keywords>
 </textClass>
 </profileDesc>
 <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2005-9">September 2005</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Juliet Sutherland<lb /></name>
  <name>Joshua Hutchinson<lb /></name>
  <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
 <pgStyleSheet>
 .w95	{ }
 .w75	{ }
 .w65	{ }
 .w55	{ }
 .w45	{ }
 .w40	{ }
 .w35	{ }
 .w30	{ }
 .w25	{ }
 @media pdf {
  .w95	{ width: 95% }
  .w75	{ width: 75% }
  .w65	{ width: 65% }
  .w55	{ width: 55% }
  .w45	{ width: 45% }
  .w40	{ width: 40% }
  .w35	{ width: 35% }
  .w30	{ width: 30% }
  .w25	{ width: 25% }
 }
 </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>

<titlePage rend="page-break-before: right">
 <docTitle><titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: x-large">Michael Angelo Buonarroti</titlePart></docTitle>
 <byline><lb />By <docAuthor>Charles Holroyd</docAuthor>,<lb /><lb />
Keeper of the National Gallery of
British Art, with Translations
of the Life of the Master by His
Scholar, Ascanio Condivi, and
Three Dialogues from the Portuguese
by Francisco d'Ollanda<lb /><lb /></byline>

<docImprint>London<lb />
Duckworth and Company<lb /><lb />
New York<lb />
Charles Scribner's Sons<lb /><lb /></docImprint>
<docDate>1903</docDate>
</titlePage>


<div rend="page-break-before: right">

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image01" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image01.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>MICHAEL ANGELO</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">From an early proof of the engraving by<lb />
GIULIO BONASONI<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">In the Print Room of the British Museum</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Frontispiece</figDesc>
</figure></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Contents</head>
<divGen type="toc" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="v" /><anchor id="Pgv" />
<head>Preface</head>

<p>Of all the many lives of Michael Angelo that have been
written, that by his friend and pupil, Ascanio Condivi, is
the most valuable. For not only is it a contemporary
record, like the lives inserted by Giorgio Vasari in the two
editions of his famous book, "The Lives of the Most
Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects," published
in Florence in 1550 and 1568; but Condivi's work has
almost the authority of an autobiography, many phrases
are in the same words, as certain letters in the hand of
Michael Angelo still in existence, especially those relating
to the early life and the ancestry of the master, to his
favourite nephew Lionardo, and concerning the whole
story of the Tragedy of the Tomb to Francesco Fattucci
and others.</p>

<p>Condivi's description of his master's personal appearance
is so detailed that we can see him with his sculptor's
callipers measuring the head of his dear master, and gazing
earnestly into his eyes, recording the colours of their
scintillations, with the patience of a painter.</p>

<p><pb n="vi" /><anchor id="Pgvi" />Vasari's account has been translated more than once,
but Condivi's never, at least never completely. Extracts
have been given, and it has been the main resource of every
writer on the master; but the faithful and reverent character
of the whole work can only be given in a complete translation,
its transparent honesty, and its loving devotion.
Even had the subject of this naif and unscholarly narrative
been an ordinary man in an ordinary period, it would have
been worth translating for its truth to life and human
nature, much more, therefore, when it is about the greatest
craftsman of the Cinque Cento.</p>

<p>Condivi published his "Vita di Michael Angelo
Buonarroti" on July 16, 1553; probably incited thereto
by the master himself, who desired to correct certain misstatements
of his excellent friend, Giorgio Vasari, without
hurting that worthy's feelings. Nevertheless, we gather
from what Vasari says in his second edition that he somewhat
resented the appearance of this new biographer.
Perhaps this coloured his unflattering account of Condivi
as an artist, when describing Michael Angelo's scholars:
"Ascanio della Ripa took great pains, but no results have
been seen, whether in designs or finished works. He spent
several years over a picture for which Michael Angelo had
given him the cartoon, and, at a word, the hopes conceived
of him have vanished in smoke." What a good thing it
would have been for Vasari's reputation if his art work
had vanished in smoke, too, and only his biographies
<pb n="vii" /><anchor id="Pgvii" />remained. Condivi lives, as he said he wished to live, in
the dedication of his work to Pope Julius III., with the
name of being a faithful servant and disciple of Michael
Angelo.</p>

<p>A second edition of the "Vita di Michael Angelo," by
Ascanio Condivi, was published at Florence in 1746. The
introduction informs us that Condivi was born at Ripa
Transona, and that he outlived his master ten years, dying
on February 17, 1563 (1564), aged nearly eighty-nine
years.</p>

<p>The second part of this book may be regarded as an
appendix<note place="foot"><p>For convenience of reference the chapters in the two parts are
divided so as to cover the same periods of time in the life of the master.</p></note> to Condivi. It is a supplementary account of
the existing works of the master, and details of their
fashioning that may help us to realise the mystery of their
production, from contemporary documents: letters, contracts,
and the life by Vasari, with some few explanations
that will not interest the learned, but may help young
students of the works of the great master. Londoners
have peculiar facilities for this study. The bas-relief in the
Diploma Gallery of the Royal Academy, the drawings in
the British Museum, and the unfinished and altered picture
at the National Gallery, are an excellent foundation from
which to study the casts at Kensington and in the Crystal
Palace (the latter are unique in this country, but, alas! in
a poor state now). Students of to-day have one immense
<pb n="viii" /><anchor id="Pgviii" />advantage over those of former times in the magnificent
series of photographs that have been issued, especially
those of the vault of the Sistine Chapel, which may
almost be said never to have been so well seen before.</p>

<p>Since this book went to press, the author has seen an
antique intaglio, No. 210 in the Estense Collection at
Modena, which he is informed came from Ferrara in 1598,
representing a Leda. This confirms the view expressed in
the note on page 61, as to the genesis of the Leda by
Michael Angelo, for it is exactly similar in composition.</p>

<p>The author desires to express his gratitude to many
friends for valuable advice and assistance, especially to
his wife for help in the translations, and to Mr. S. Arthur
Strong for kindly looking over the proofs, and other aid;
to the Earl of Leicester, of Holkham, for permission to
photograph and reproduce the Cartoon at Holkham Hall;
to the trustees of the British Museum and Mr. Sidney
Colvin for facilities to reproduce two engravings in the
Print Room; to the Signori Fratelli Alinari, Signor
Anderson, Mm. Braun et Cie., and Signor Brogi, for kindly
allowing their photographs to be used in making the
illustrations.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="pdf" /><index index="toc" />
<pb n="xi" /><anchor id="Pgxi" />
<head>Illustrations</head>
<divGen type="fig" />
</div>

</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="1" /><anchor id="Pg1" /><head>PART I</head>

<p>THE LIFE OF MICHAEL ANGELO BUONARROTI,<lb />
BY HIS SCHOLAR ASCANIO CONDIVI,<lb />
TRANSLATED BY CHARLES HOLROYD</p>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="3" /><anchor id="Pg3" /><head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">THE RAPE OF DEIANIRA, OR THE BATTLE OF THE
CENTAURS AND THE ANGEL OF THE SHRINE OF
SAINT DOMINIC</head>

<p>Michael Angelo Buonarroti, the unique painter and
sculptor, was descended from the Counts of Canossa, a
noble and illustrious family of the land of Reggio, both on
account of their own worth and antiquity, and because
they had Imperial blood in their veins.<note place="foot"><p>Count Alessandro da Canossa acknowledged relationship to
Michael Angelo in a letter, dated October 4, 1520 (Gotti, i. 4), addressing
the master as "honoured kinsman," but the relationship
cannot now be proved. The ancestors of Michael Angelo have been
traced to one Bernardo who died before the year 1228, and they played
their part as citizens of Florence, no mean city, for more than two
hundred years&mdash;a noble pedigree even for Michael Angelo.</p></note> For Beatrice,
sister of Enrico II., was given in marriage to Count
Bonifazio of Canossa, then Signor of Mantua; the Countess
Matilda was their daughter, a lady of rare and singular
prudence and piety; who, after the death of her husband
Gottifredo, held in Italy (besides Mantua) Lucca, Parma,
Reggio, and part of Tuscany, which to-day is called the
Patrimonio of San Pietro; and, having in her lifetime done
many things worthy of memory, died and was buried in
the Badia of San Benedetto, beyond the walls of Mantua,
which abbey she had built, and largely endowed.</p>

<p><pb n="4" /><anchor id="Pg4" />II. Messer Simone then, of this family, coming to
Florence as Podestà<note place="foot"><p>A paid magistrate or mayor, generally from a neighbouring town
or country and not a citizen of the place where he was on duty.</p></note> in the year 1250, was deemed worthy
of being made a citizen, and head of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">sesitiere</hi> or sixth
part of the town, for into so many wards was the township
divided at that time; to-day the wards are <hi rend="font-style: italic">quartieri</hi> or
fourth parts. The Guelph party were in power in Florence,
and he, from Ghibelline that he was, became Guelph,
because of the many benefits he received from that faction,
changing the colour of his coat-of-arms, which originally
was gules, a dog rampant with a bone in his mouth,
argent&mdash;to azure, a dog or; and the Signoria afterwards
granted him five lilies, gules, in a Rastrello, and at
the same time the crest with two horns of a bull, the
one or, and the other azure, as may be seen to this day
painted on their ancient shields; the old arms of Messer
Simone may be seen in the palace of the Podestà, carved
in marble by his orders, according to the custom of those
who held that office.</p>

<p>III. The reason why the family in Florence changed
their name from Canossa to de'Buonarroti was because the
name Buonarroto was usual in their house from age to age,
almost always, down to the time of Michael Angelo himself,
who had a brother called Buonarroto, and many of
these Buonarroti being of the Signori, that is of the
supreme magistracy of the Republic; the said brother
especially, who was of that body at the time when Pope
Leo was in Florence, as may be seen in the annals of the
city; this name held by so many of them became a surname
for the whole family, the more easily as it is the
<pb n="5" /><anchor id="Pg5" />custom of Florence in the lists of voters and other nomination
papers, after the proper name of the citizen, to add that
of his father, his grandfather, his great-grandfather, and
even of those further removed. Therefore, from the many
Buonarroti thus continued, and from that Simone who
was the first of the family to settle in Florence, and who
was of the House of Canossa, they became Buonarroti
Simoni, for so they are called at this day. Lastly, Pope
Leo X. being at Florence, besides many other privileges,
gave to this family the right to bear on their coat the
palla or ball, azure, of the arms of the House of Medici,
with three lilies, or</p>

<p>IV. Of such family, then, was Michael Angelo born; his
father's name was Lodovico di Leonardo Buonarroti
Simoni, a good and religious man, somewhat old-fashioned.
Michael Angelo was born to him whilst he was Podestà of
Chiusi and Caprese<note place="foot"><p>Caprese is made up of scattered hamlets and farmhouses near
Arezzo, upon the watershed between the Tiber and the Arno.</p></note> in the Casentino, in the year of our
salvation 1474,<note place="foot"><p>Upon March 6, 1475, according to our present reckoning, Lodovico
wrote in his note-book:</p>

<p>"I record that on this day, March 6, 1474, a male child was born to
me. I gave him the name of Michael Angelo, and he was born on a
Monday morning four or five hours before daybreak, and he was born
while I was Podestà of Caprese, and he was born at Caprese; and the
godfathers were those I have named below. He was baptized on the
eighth of the same month in the Church of San Giovanni at Caprese."
Then follow the godfathers; there are ten of them.</p></note> on the sixth day of March, four hours
before daylight on a Monday. A fine nativity truly, which
showed how great the child would be and of how noble a
genius; for the planet Mercury with Venus in seconda
being received into the house of Jupiter with benign
<pb n="6" /><anchor id="Pg6" />aspect, promised what afterwards followed, that the birth
should be of a noble and high genius, able to succeed
in every undertaking, but principally in those arts that
delight the senses, such as painting, sculpture, and architecture.
Having completed his term of office, the father
returned to Florence and put the child out to nurse in
the village of Settignano, three miles from the city, where
he had a property, which was one of the first places in
that country bought by Messer Simone da Canossa. The
nurse was a daughter of a stone-carver and the wife of a
stone-carver, so Michael Angelo used to say jestingly, but
perhaps in earnest too, that it was no wonder he delighted
in the use of the chisel, knowing that the milk of the
foster-mother has such power in us that often it will
change the disposition, one bent being thus altered to
another of a very different nature.</p>

<p>V. The child grew and came to be of a reasonable age.
His father, noticing his ability, desired that he should
devote himself to letters; he therefore sent him to the
school of a certain Maestro Francesco da Urbino, who in
those days taught grammar in Florence;<note place="foot"><p>Maestro Francesco only taught Michael Angelo to read and write
in the vulgar tongue, for his pupil complained in after life that he
knew no Latin; this was not Francesco's fault, for his pupil soon followed
his friend's&mdash;another Francesco&mdash;influence and neglected literature
for the art that made him famous.</p></note> but although
Michael Angelo made progress in these studies, still the
heavens and his nature, both difficult to withstand, drew
him towards the study of painting, so that he could not
resist, whenever he could steal the time, drawing now here,
now there, and seeking the company of painters. Amongst
<pb n="7" /><anchor id="Pg7" />his familiar friends was Francesco Granacci, a scholar of
Domenico del Grillandaio,<note place="foot"><p>Ghirlandaio, born 1449, died 1494.</p></note> who, seeing the ardent longing
and burning desire of the child, determined to aid him,
and continually exhorted him to the study of art, now
lending him drawings and now taking him with him to
the workshops of his master when some works were going
forward from which he might learn. These sights moved
Michael Angelo so powerfully, following as they did his
nature, which never ceased to urge him, that he altogether
abandoned letters. So that his father and his uncles, who
held the art in contempt, were much displeased, and often
beat him severely for it: they were so ignorant of the
excellence and nobility of art that they thought shame to
have her in the house. This, however much he disliked
it, was not enough to turn him back, but, on the contrary,
made him more bold: he wished to begin to colour, and he
borrowed a print from Granacci which represented the
story of St. Antony when he was beaten by devils. The
engraver was a certain Martino d'Olanda,<note place="foot"><p>Martin Schongauer, born at Colmar about 1450, died 1488.</p></note> a brave artist
for that time. Michael Angelo painted it on a panel of
wood, Granacci lending him colours and brushes, in such
a manner that not only did it raise the admiration of
every one who saw it, but also envy, as some will have it,
even in Domenico, the most famous painter of the day;
as may be seen by what happened afterwards. Domenico
used to say that the painting came from his own workshop
in order to make it appear less wonderful. In this
little picture, besides the figure of the Saint, there were
many strange forms and <corr sic="montrosities" resp="Hutchinson">monstrosities</corr> in the demons;
these Michael Angelo executed with so much care that no
<pb n="8" /><anchor id="Pg8" />part of them was coloured without reference to the natural
object from which it had been derived. For that purpose
he frequented the fish-market and observed the forms and
tints of the scales and fins of fish and the colours of their
eyes and all their other parts, copying them in his picture,
which much conduced to the perfection of that work, exciting
the wonder of the world, and, as I have said, some
envy in Grillandaio; this was much more seen one day
when Michael Angelo asked to see his book of drawings
in which were represented shepherds with their flocks and
dogs, landscapes, buildings, ruins, and such like things.
Domenico would not lend it to him&mdash;indeed, he had the
reputation of being a little envious: for not only was he
hardly courteous to Michael Angelo, but even to his own
brother, when he saw that he was progressing rapidly and
having great hopes of himself: he sent him into France,
not so much that it might be to his advantage, as some
say, but that he himself might remain the first artist in
Florence. The reason I have mentioned this is because I
have heard it said that the son of Domenico attributes
the excellence and divinity of Michael Angelo in great
part to the training he received from his father: he
received absolutely no assistance from him;<note place="foot"><p>When Michael Angelo was thirteen years old Lodovico gave in to
his wishes and apprenticed him to Domenico Ghirlandajo (he was
called Ghirlandajo because as a goldsmith he had made garlands of
golden leaves for the brows of the Florentine ladies) upon the unusual
terms set forth in the following minute from Domenico's ledger under
the date 1488:</p>

  <p>"I record this first of April how that I,
  Lodovico di Lionardo di Buonarrota, bind my son Michael Angelo to
  Domenico and Davit di Tommaso di Currado for the next three ensuing
  years, under these conditions and contracts: to wit that the said
  Michael Angelo shall stay with the above-named masters during this
  time, to learn the art of painting, and to practise the same, and
  to be at the order of the above-named; and they for their part,
  shall give him in the course of these three years twenty-four
  florins (fiorini di Sagello, <hi rend="font-style: italic">£</hi>8 12<hi
  rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi>); to wit, six florins in the first year,
  eight in the second, ten in the third, making in all the sum of
  ninety-six pounds (lire)."</p>

<p>A note of April 16, 1488, records that two florins were paid to
Michael Angelo upon that day. The total sum is estimated by Gotti
(p. 6, note) to equal 206.40 lira present value&mdash;about <hi rend="font-style: italic">£</hi>8 12<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> It was
usual for apprentices to pay a sum to their masters rather than to be
paid.</p></note> nevertheless,
<pb n="9" /><anchor id="Pg9" />Michael Angelo does not complain of it, nay, even praises
Domenico both for his art and his manners. But this is a
slight digression; let us return to our story.</p>

<p>VI. Possibly not less wonderful was another labour of
Michael Angelo's done at this time, perhaps as a jest.
Some one lent him a drawing of a head to copy; he returned
his copy to the owner instead of the original and
the deception was not noticed, but the boy talking and
laughing about it with one of his companions it was
found out. Many people compared the two and found no
difference in them, for besides the perfection of the drawing,
Michael Angelo had smoked the paper to make it appear
of the same age as the original. This brought him a
great reputation.<note place="foot"><p>Drawings, even by old masters, were of no pecuniary value in
those days; they were merely kept for use in the workshop. The
fashion of collecting drawings for their own sake was invented by
Giorgio Vasari some sixty years later.</p></note></p>

<p>VII. Now drawing one thing and now another, the
boy had no fixed plan or method of study. It happened
one day that Granacci took him to the gardens of the
Medici at San Marco. In this garden the Magnificent
<pb n="10" /><anchor id="Pg10" />Lorenzo, father of Pope Leo, a man renowned for every
excellence, had disposed many antique statues and decorative
sculptures. Michael Angelo, seeing these things and
appreciating the beauty of them, never afterwards went
to the workshop of Domenico, but spent every day at the
gardens, as in a better school, always working at something
or other. Amongst the rest, he studied one day
the head of a Faun, in appearance very old, with a long
beard and a laughing face, although the mouth could
hardly be seen because of the injuries of time. As if knowing
what would be, or because he liked the style of it, he
determined to copy it in marble. The Magnificent
Lorenzo was having some marble worked and dressed in
that place to ornament the most noble library that he
and his ancestors had gathered together from all parts of
the world. (These works, suspended on account of the
death of Lorenzo and other accidents, were, after many
years, carried on by Pope Clement, but even then they
were left unfinished, so that the books are still packed in
chests.) Now these marbles being worked, as I said,
Michael Angelo begged a piece from the masons and borrowed
a chisel from them: with so much diligence and
intelligence did he copy that Faun that in a few days it
was carried to perfection, his imagination supplying all
that was missing in the antique, such as the lips, open, as
in a man who is laughing, so that the hollow of the
mouth was seen with all the teeth. At this moment
passed the Magnificent to see how his works progressed; he
found the child, who was busy polishing the head. He
spoke to him at once, noticing in the first place the beauty
of the work, and having regard to the lad's youth he
marvelled exceedingly, and although he praised the workmanship
<pb n="11" /><anchor id="Pg11" />he none the less joked with him as with a child,
saying: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Oh! you have made this Faun very old, and yet
have left him all his teeth: do you not know that old men of that
age always lack some of them?</hi>" It seemed a thousand years
to Michael Angelo before the Magnificent went away and
he remained alone to correct his error. He cut away a tooth
from the upper jaw, drilling a hole in the gums as though
it had come out by the roots.<note place="foot"><p>There is a mask of a grinning faun to be seen in the Bargello at
Florence, attributed to Michael Angelo and said to be this his first work
in sculpture. It does not correspond with either the account of Vasari
or of Condivi; it is a poor and ugly piece of work, and shows no sign
whatever of the early style of Michael Angelo, but is more likely a work
of a later period by some one who had seen the mask under the left
arm of "The Night" on the tomb of Lorenzo at San Lorenzo.</p></note> He awaited the return of
the Magnificent upon another day with great longing.
At last he came. Seeing the willingness and single-mindedness
of the child he laughed very much, but
afterwards appreciating the beauty of the thing and
the boy's youth, as father of all talent he thought to
bestow his favour upon such a genius and take him
into his house, and hearing from him whose son he was,
he said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Let your father know that I desire to speak
with him.</hi>"</p>

<p>VIII. When he got home Michael Angelo carried out
the embassy of the Magnificent; his father divining why
he was called, with great persuasion from Granacci and
others made ready to go: lamenting to himself that his
son would be taken away. Stating, moreover, that he
would never suffer his son to be a stonemason, it was
useless for Granacci to explain how great was the difference
between a sculptor and a mason. After all this long
<pb n="12" /><anchor id="Pg12" />disputation he ultimately was ushered into the presence of
the Magnificent, who asked him if he would deliver his
son over to his care, for he would not neglect him; "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Even
so,</hi>" he replied, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">not only Michael Angelo, but all of us,
with our lives and all our best faculties, are at the service of
your Magnificence.</hi>" And when the Magnificent asked
what he could do for himself, he replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I have never
practised any profession; but have always lived upon my
small income and attended to the small property left to me
by my ancestors; trying not only to keep it up properly, but
also endeavouring to increase it as far as I may with my
powers and by my diligence.</hi>" The Magnificent then replied:
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Very well, look about you, see if there is not something
in Florence that will suit you; make use of me; I
will do the best I can for you.</hi>" And so dismissing the old
man, he gave Michael Angelo a good room in his own
house with all that he needed,<note place="foot"><p>"During this time Michael Angelo received from the Magnifico an
allowance of five ducats per month, and was furthermore presented for
his gratification with a violet-coloured mantle. But, indeed, all the
young men who studied in the gardens received stipends of greater or
less amount from the liberality of that Magnificent and most noble
citizen, being constantly encouraged and rewarded by him whilst he
lived." (Vasari.)</p></note> treating him like a son,
with a seat at his table, which was frequented every day
by noblemen and men of great affairs. Now they had a
custom that those who were present at the beginning of a
meal should take their places next to the Magnificent
according to their rank, and should not change them, no
matter who came in afterwards; so that often Michael
Angelo was seated even above the sons of Lorenzo and
other persons of quality; for in that house noble persons
abounded: by all of them Michael Angelo was caressed and
<pb n="13" /><anchor id="Pg13" />incited to his honourable work; but above all by the Magnificent,
who would often call for him many times in the
day to show him engraved gems,<note place="foot"><p>Many motives from antique gems may be traced in the art of
Michael Angelo, such as the Judith and her maid, some of the athletes
the Leda, and even the Adam.</p></note> cornelians, medals, and
such like things of great price, seeing that he had genius
and good judgment.</p>

<p>IX. Michael Angelo was between fifteen and sixteen
years of age when he entered the house of the Magnificent,
and he stayed with him until his death, which was in
ninety-two,<note place="foot"><p>Lorenzo died upon the eighth day of April, 1492.</p></note> a space of two years. During that time an
office in the customs fell vacant which could only be held
by a Florentine citizen; so Lodovico, the father of Michael
Angelo, came to the Magnificent and spoke for it:
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Lorenzo, I can do nothing but read and write; the comrade
of Marco Pucci in the Dogana is dead. I should like
to have his place. I believe I shall be able to carry out the
duties properly.</hi>" The Magnificent put his hand upon his
shoulder and, smiling, said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You will always be poor</hi>,"
for he expected that he would ask for some great thing.
However, he continued, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">If you will be the comrade of
Marco, be it so, till something better turns up</hi>." This place
brought him eight scudi<note place="foot"><p>Equal to-day to 20.60 lire&mdash;about seventeen shillings.</p></note> the month, a little more or a
little less.</p>

<p>X. In the meantime Michael Angelo prosecuted his
studies, showing the result of his labours to the Magnificent
each day. In the same house lived Poliziano, a man,
<pb n="14" /><anchor id="Pg14" />as every one knows, and as is testified by his works, most
learned and witty. This man recognising the lofty spirit
of Michael Angelo loved him exceedingly, and little as
he needed it, spurred him on in his studies, always explaining
things to him and giving him subjects. One day,
amongst others, he suggested "The Rape of Deianira"
and "The Battle of the Centaurs," telling him in detail
the whole of the story. Michael Angelo set himself to
carve it out in marble in mezzo-rilievo, and so well did he
succeed, that I remember to have heard him say that when
he saw it again he recognised how much wrong he had
done to his nature in not following promptly the art of
sculpture, judging by that work how well he might have
succeeded, nor does he say this boastingly, he was a most
modest man, but because he truly laments having been so
unfortunate that by the fault of others he has sometimes
been ten or twelve years doing nothing, as will be seen
presently. This particular work may still be seen in
Florence in his house; the figures are about two palms
high.<note place="foot"><p>Nineteen and a quarter inches according to the measurements of
Heath Wilson ("Michael Angelo and his Works," p. 17, ed. 1881). This
relief is in the Casa Buonarroti, Florence.</p></note> He had hardly finished this work when the
Magnificent Lorenzo passed out of this life, and Michael
Angelo returned to his father's house. So much grief did
he feel for his patron's death that for many days he
was unable to work. When he was himself again he
bought a large piece of marble, that had for many years
been exposed to the wind and rain, and carved a Hercules
out of it, four braccia high, that was ultimately sent into
France.<note place="foot"><p>We have no record of this work, and its whereabouts is not
known.</p></note></p>

<p><pb n="15" /><anchor id="Pg15" />XI. Whilst he was working at this statue there was a
great snowstorm in Florence, and Pier de' Medici, the
eldest son of Lorenzo, who occupied the same position
as his father, wished childishly to have a statue of
snow made in the middle of the court-yard, so he
remembered Michael Angelo, and had him found and
made him carve the statue.<note place="foot"><p>The boy, Michael Angelo, probably enjoyed this frolic and its
attendant festivities as much as Piero, he could not have done much
other work in the dungeon-like studios of Florence in such cold weather.
This incident has been regarded as an insult to the artist and a sign of
Piero's want of taste. Michael Angelo cannot have felt aggrieved as he
stayed on at the palace. Condivi relates that he remained "some
months." Piero should rather be blamed for not employing his artist
guest upon some more lasting work also.</p></note> He desired him to live
in his house as he had done in his father's time, and
gave him the same apartment and a place at the table
as before; where the same customs obtained as when
the father was living, that is, that after they had sat
down at the beginning of a meal no one should change
his place however great might be the personage who
came in afterwards.</p>

<p>XII. Lodovico, the father of Michael Angelo, now
became more friendly to his son, seeing that he was almost
always in the society of great personages, and he dressed
him in finer clothes. The youth lived with Piero some
months and was much caressed by him. Piero used to
say, boastingly, that he had two remarkable men in
his establishment: one was Michael Angelo, and the
other a certain Spanish groom who, besides being
marvellously beautiful to look upon, was so nimble and
strong and so long-winded that, let Piero ride as fast
<pb n="16" /><anchor id="Pg16" />as he could, he was not able to pass the runner by a
finger.</p>

<p>XIII. At this time, Michael Angelo, to please the
Prior of Santo Spirito, a church much venerated in
Florence, carved a crucifix in wood, a little under life size,
which to this day may be seen over the high altar of that
church.<note place="foot"><p>Nothing is known as to the fate of this work, it is not now in the
church.</p></note> He had much familiar intercourse with the
Prior, and received many kindnesses from him, amongst
others the use of a room and subjects to enable him to
study anatomy. Nothing could have given him more
pleasure, and this was the beginning of his study of the
science of anatomy, which he followed until fortune had
made him a master of it.<note place="foot"><p>Vasari states that Michael Angelo devoted much time to the study
of anatomy. "For the church of Santo Spirito, in Florence, Michael
Angelo made a crucifix in wood, which is placed over the lunette of the
high altar. This he did to please the Prior, who had given him a
room wherein he dissected many dead bodies, zealously studying
anatomy." (Vasari.)</p>

<p>A pen drawing at Oxford shows us two students studying anatomy
at night; the body of the subject supports the torch; one student
holds a pair of compasses in his right hand for measuring the
proportions.</p></note></p>

<p>XIV. There was living in the house of Piero a certain
man named Cardiere, who had been very acceptable to the
Magnifico, he improvised songs to the lyre most marvellously;
in fact, he made a profession of it, and practised
his art nearly every evening after supper. This man was
friendly with Michael Angelo and imparted to him a
vision, which was this: That Lorenzo de' Medici had
<pb n="17" /><anchor id="Pg17" />appeared to him with nothing but a black cloak, all torn,
over his naked body, and had commanded him to speak to
his son, and tell him that shortly he would be hunted out
of his house and never return to it again. Piero de'
Medici was so proud and insolent that neither the generosity
of his brother, Giovanni the Cardinal, nor the
courtesy and kindness of Giuliano, were so powerful to
keep him in Florence as those vices were to hunt him out.
Michael Angelo exhorted Cardiere to inform Piero of the
vision and carry out the will of Lorenzo, but he, fearing
Piero's nature, kept all to himself. One other morning
Michael Angelo was in the court-yard of the Palace, and
beheld Cardiere all terrified and weeping: that night, he
said, Lorenzo had appeared to him again in the same
form as at first, and looking him through and through
had given him a terrible box on the ears, because he had
not reported what he had seen to Piero. Michael Angelo
scolded him to such purpose that Cardiere plucked up his
spirit and set out on foot for Careggi, a country house of
the Medici, about three miles from the city, where his
master was staying. But when he was half-way there he
met Piero on the road returning home to Florence;
Cardiere stopped him and told him all he had seen and
heard. Piero only laughed at him, and made even his
grooms jeer at him. The Chancellor, who was afterwards
the Cardinal Bibbiena, said to him: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You must be mad!
Do you think Lorenzo would rather appear to you or to his
own son? Would he not rather appear to him than to any
one else?</hi>" They ridiculed him and let him go. He
went home and bemoaned himself to Michael Angelo,
and he spoke so effectually of the vision, holding that
the thing was true, that two days afterwards with two
<pb n="18" /><anchor id="Pg18" />companions they left Florence together for Bologna, and
from there went to Venice, fearful lest that which Cardiere
prophesied should come to pass, and Florence not be safe
for them!</p>

<p>XV. In a few days lack of funds (his companions
having spent all his money) made Michael Angelo think
of returning to Florence; but coming to Bologna a curious
chance hindered them. Now there was a law in that
land in the time of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli that every
stranger who entered into Bologna should be obliged to
have a great seal of red wax impressed upon his nail.
Michael Angelo inadvertently entered without being
sealed, so he was conducted, together with his companions,
to the office of the Bullette, and condemned to pay a fine
of fifty Bolognese lire: not having the wherewithal he
was obliged to remain at the office. A certain Bolognese
gentleman, Messer Gian Francesco Aldovrandi, who was
then of the Sixteen, seeing him there, and hearing the
reason, liberated him, chiefly because he was a sculptor.
Aldovrandi invited the sculptor to his house. Michael
Angelo thanked him, but excused himself because he had
two companions with him who would not leave him, and
he would not burden the gentleman with their company.
To this the gentleman replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I, too, will come and
wander over the world with you, if you will pay my
expenses.</hi>" With these and other words he prevailed over
Michael Angelo, who excused himself to his companions
and took leave of them, gave them what little money he
had, and went to lodge with the gentleman.</p>

<p>XVI. By this time the House of the Medici, with all
<pb n="19" /><anchor id="Pg19" />their followers, having been hunted out of Florence, came
to Bologna and were lodged in the House of the Rossi.
Thus the vision of Cardiere, whether a delusion of the
devil, a divine warning, or a strong imagination that had
taken hold of him, was verified; a thing so truly remarkable
that it is worthy of being recorded. I have narrated
it just as I heard it from Michael Angelo himself. It was
about three years after the death of the Magnificent
Lorenzo that his children were exiled from Florence, so
that Michael Angelo was between twenty and twenty-one
years of age when he escaped the first popular tumults by
remaining with the aforesaid gentleman of Bologna until
the city of Florence settled down again. This gentleman
honoured him highly, delighting in his genius, and every
evening he made him read something from Dante or from
Petrarca, or now and then from Boccaccio, until he fell
asleep.</p>

<p>XVII. One day walking together in Bologna they went
to see the ark of San Domenico, in the Church dedicated
to that Saint; two marble figures were still lacking, a San
Petronio and a kneeling angel supporting a candlestick in
his arms. The gentleman asked Michael Angelo if he
had the heart to undertake them, and he replying "yes,"
had it arranged that he should have them to do; he was
paid thirty ducats for it, eighteen for the San Petronio,
and twelve for the angel. The figures were three palms high;
they may still be seen in that same place. But afterwards
Michael Angelo mistrusted a Bolognese sculptor, who complained
that he had taken away the commission for the
before-mentioned statues from him, as it had first been
promised to him, and as he threatened to do him an injury
<pb n="20" /><anchor id="Pg20" />Michael Angelo went back to Florence to accommodate
matters,<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo left Bologna hastily under fear of personal violence
from the sculptors and native craftsmen, who said he was taking
the bread out of their mouths, rather a strong compliment to a boy of
twenty.</p></note> as affairs had now become quiet and he could
live safely in his house. He remained with Messer
Gian Francesco Aldovrandi a little over a year.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="21" /><anchor id="Pg21" /><head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">THE BACCHUS AND THE MADONNA DELLA PIETÀ
OF SAINT PETER'S</head>

<p>XVIII. Having returned to his native town Michael
Angelo set to work to carve out of marble a god of Love,
between six and seven years of age, lying asleep; this
figure was seen by Lorenzo di Pier Francesco de' Medici
(for whom in the meantime Michael Angelo had carved a
little Saint John), and he judged that it was most beautiful
and said of it: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">If you can manage to make it look as if it
had been buried under the earth I will forward it to Rome,
it will be taken for an antique and you will sell it much better.</hi>"
Michael Angelo hearing this immediately prepared it as
one from whom no craft was hidden, so that it looked as if
it had been made many years ago. In this state it was
sent to Rome; the Cardinal di San Giorgio bought it as
an antique for two hundred ducats; though the man who
took all that money only paid thirty ducats to Michael
Angelo as what he had received for the Cupid. So much
of a rogue was he that he deceived at the same time both
Lorenzo di Pier Francesco and Michael Angelo.<note place="foot"><p>The dealer Baldassari del Milanese paid Michael Angelo thirty
ducats for this work, and sold it to Raffaello Riario, Cardinal di San
Giorgio, as an antique for two hundred ducats, an evidence, not of the
Cardinal's foolishness, but of Michael Angelo's careful study of the
antique.</p></note> But
<pb n="22" /><anchor id="Pg22" />meanwhile it came to the ear of the Cardinal how the
putto was made in Florence. Angry at being made a fool
of, he sent one of his gentlemen there, who pretended to
be looking for a sculptor to do some work in Rome. After
visiting many others he came to the house of Michael
Angelo; with a wary eye for what he wanted he observed
the young man and inquired of him if he could let him see
any work; but Michael Angelo not having any to show,
took a pen (for in those days the pencil was not in general
use) and drew a hand with so much ease that the gentleman
was astonished. Afterwards he inquired if he had
never done any works of sculpture. Yes, replied Michael
Angelo, and amongst the rest a Cupid, in such and such a
pose and action. The gentleman understood then that he
had found the man he sought, and narrated how the affair
had gone, and promised him that if he would come with
him to Rome he would make the dealer disgorge, and
arrange matters with his lord which he knew would be
much to his satisfaction. Michael Angelo then, partly to
see Rome, so much be praised by the gentleman as the
widest field for a man to show his genius in, went with
him and lodged in his house near the palace of the
Cardinal, who, advised by letter in the meantime how the
matter stood, laid hands on the merchant who had sold
the Cupid to him as an antique, returned the statue to him,
and got his money back; it afterwards came, I know not
how, into the hands of the Duke Valentino, and was presented
to the Marchesana of Mantua. She sent it to
Mantua, where it is still to be found in the house of the
lords of that city.<note place="foot"><p>The Cardinal S. Giorgio made Messer Baldassari refund the two
hundred ducats and take the Cupid back, so Michael Angelo got nothing
for his journey. Cesare Borgia presented this Cupid to Guidobaldo di
Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino. After Cesare Borgia sacked the town of
Urbino in 1592 he sent the Cupid to the Marchioness of Mantua, who
wrote on July 22, 1592, describing the Cupid as "without a peer among
the works of modern times." There is a sleeping Cupid at Mantua in
the Museo Civico, but it is not by Michael Angelo. Signor Fabriczy
holds that a Cupid preserved in the museum at Turin may be Michael
Angelo's original work, but the translator has not seen it.</p></note> The Cardinal di San Giorgio was
<pb n="23" /><anchor id="Pg23" />blamed in this affair by many, for the work was seen by
all the craftsmen of Rome, and all, equally, considered it
most beautiful; they thought that he ought not to have
deprived himself of it for the sake of two hundred scudi,
although it was modern, as he was a very rich man. But
he, smarting under the deceit, being able to punish the
man, made him disburse the remainder of the payment.
But nobody suffered more than Michael Angelo, who
never received anything more for it than the money
paid him in Florence. Cardinal di San Giorgio understood
little and was no judge of sculpture, as is shown
clearly enough by the fact that all the time Michael
Angelo remained with him, which was about a year, he
did not give him a single commission.<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo arrived in Rome for the first time at the end
of June 1496, and wrote in July to Lorenzo di' Pier Francesco de'
Medici. The letter bears a superscription to Sandro Botticelli; historians
presume from this that it was not safe to write openly to any of the
Medici.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"2nd day of July, 1496.</p>

<p>"Magnificent Lorenzo,&mdash;I only write to inform you that last
Saturday we arrived safely, and went at once to visit the Cardinal di
San Giorgio; and I presented your letter to him. It appeared to me
that he was pleased to see me, and he expressed a wish that I should
go immediately to inspect his collection of statues. I spent the whole
day there, and for that reason was unable to deliver all your letters.
On Sunday the Cardinal came into the new house, and had me sent
for. I went to him, and he asked me what I thought about the things
I had seen. I replied by stating my opinion, and certainly I can say
with sincerity that there are many fine things in the collection. Then
he asked me if I had the courage to make some beautiful work. I
answered that I should not be able to achieve anything so great, but
that he should see what I could do. We have bought a piece of marble
for a life size statue, and on Monday I shall begin to work. On Monday
last I presented your other letter of recommendation to Rucellai, who
offered me what money I might want; also those to Cavalcanti. Afterwards
I gave your letter to Baldassare, and asked him for the child
(the sleeping Cupid), saying I was ready to refund his money. He
answered very roughly, swearing he would rather break it in a hundred
pieces; he had bought the child and it was his property; he possessed
writing which proved that he had satisfied the person who sent
it to him, and was under no apprehension that he should have to give
it up. Then he complained bitterly of you, saying that you had
spoken ill of him. Certain of our Florentines sought to accommodate
matters, but failed in their attempt. Now I look to coming to terms
through the Cardinal; for this is the advice of Baldassare Balducci.
What ensues I will report to you. No more by this. To you I recommend
myself. May God keep you from evil.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Michael Angelo, in Rome.</p>
<p rend="text-align: right">"To Sandro Botticelli, at Florence."</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">(Gotti, ii. 32.)</p></note></p>

<p><pb n="24" /><anchor id="Pg24" />XIX. All the same, others were not wanting who
understood such things and who made use of Michael
Angelo. For Messer Iacopo Galli, a Roman gentleman
of good understanding, made him carve a marble Bacchus,
ten palms in height, in his house; this work in form
and bearing in every part corresponds to the description
of the ancient writers&mdash;his aspect, merry; the eyes,
squinting and lascivious, like those of people excessively
given to the love of wine. He holds a cup in his right
hand, like one about to drink, and looks at it lovingly,
taking pleasure in the liquor of which he was the inventor;
for this reason he is crowned with a garland of vine leaves.
<pb n="25" /><anchor id="Pg25" />On his left arm he has a tiger's skin, the animal dedicated
to him, as one that lives on grapes; and the skin was
represented rather than the animal, as Michael Angelo
desired to signify that he who allows his senses to be overcome
by the appetite for that fruit, and the liquor pressed
from it, ultimately loses his life. In his left hand he holds
a bunch of grapes, which a merry and alert little satyr at
his feet furtively enjoys. He appears to be about seven
years old, and the Bacchus eighteen.<note place="foot"><p>This ugly, but marvellously-finished statue is now in the western
corridor of the Uffizi, in Florence. See p. 107.</p></note> The said Messer
Iacopo desired also that he would carve him a little Cupid.<note place="foot"><p>See p. 108.</p></note>
Both of these works may still be seen in the house of
Messer Giuliano and Messer Paolo Galli, courteous and
worthy gentlemen, with whom Michael Angelo has always
retained a real and cordial friendship.</p>

<p>XX. A little afterwards, at the request of the Cardinal
de San Dionigi (called the Cardinal Rovano), he carved
from a block of marble that marvellous statue of our
Lady, which is now in the church of the Madonna della


Febbre;<note place="foot"><p>The work is now in the first chapel on the right in the nave of
the Basilica of Saint Peter's.</p></note> although at first it was placed in the chapel of
the King of France in the Church of Santa Petronilla, near
to the Sacristy of Saint Peter's, formerly, according to
some, a temple of Mars; this church was destroyed by
Bramante for the sake of his design for the new Saint
Peter's. The Madonna is seated on the stone upon which
the Cross was erected, with her dead son on her lap. He
is of so great and so rare a beauty, that no one beholds
it but is moved to pity. A figure truly worthy of the
<pb n="26" /><anchor id="Pg26" />Humanity which belonged to the Son of God, and to such
a Mother; nevertheless, some there be who complain that
the Mother is too young compared to the Son. One day
as I was talking to Michael Angelo of this objection,
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Do you not know</hi>," he said, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">that chaste women retain
their fresh looks much longer than those who are not chaste?
How much more, therefore, a virgin in whom not even the
least unchaste desire ever arose? And I tell you, moreover,
that such freshness and flower of youth besides being maintained
in her by natural causes, it may possibly be that it was
ordained by the Divine Power to prove to the world the virginity
and perpetual purity of the Mother. It was not necessary
in the Son; but rather the contrary; wishing to show
that the Son of God took upon himself a true human body
subject to all the ills of man, excepting only sin; he did not
allow the divine in him to hold back the human, but let it run
its course and obey its laws, as was proved in His appointed
time. Do not wonder then that I have, for all these reasons,
made the most Holy Virgin, Mother of God, a great deal
younger in comparison with her Son than she is usually
represented. To the Son I have allotted His full age</hi>." Considerations
worthy of any theologian, wonderful perhaps in
any one else, but not in Michael Angelo, whom God and
Nature have formed not only for his unique craftsmanship,
but also capable of any, the most divine, conceptions, as
may be seen not only in this but in very many of his
arguments and writings. He may have been twenty-four
or twenty-five years old when he finished this work. He
gained great fame and reputation by it, so that already, in
the opinion of the world, not only did he greatly surpass
all others of the time and of the times before, but also he
challenged the ancients themselves.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="27" /><anchor id="Pg27" /><index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" /><head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE DAVID AND THE CARTOON OF PISA</head>

<p>XXI. These works being finished, he had to return to
Florence for family affairs; he stayed there long enough
to carve the statue called by all men the Giant, which
is placed to this day by the door of the Palazzo della
Signoria at the end of the balustrade.<note place="foot"><p>Now in the Accademia delle Belle Arti of Florence, where it was
placed for its better preservation in 1831.</p></note> The thing
happened in this wise. The Operai<note place="foot"><p>The Office of Works.</p></note> of Santa Maria del
Fiore possessed a piece of marble nine braccia high, which
had been brought from Carrara by an artist<note place="foot"><p>Documents, copies of which are to be found in "Gaye," vol. ii.
pp. 454-464, go to prove that this sculptor was Agostino di Antonio di
Duccio, who was born in 1418 and died in 1481. He was the author of
the relief illustrating the life of S. Gemignano upon the façade of the
Duomo at Modena, and some of the beautiful and delicate marble
reliefs set in the polychromatic front of the Oratory of S. Bernardino at
Perugia, and the fairy-like low relief (bassissimi rilievi) panels that
decorate the interior of the temple of Malatesta at Rimini.</p></note> who was not
so wise as he ought to have been, as it appeared. Because
to transport the marble with greater convenience and less
labour, he had roughed it out on the quay itself in such a
clumsy way, however, that neither he nor any one else had
the courage to put their hands to the block to carve a
statue out of it, either of the full size of the marble or
<pb n="28" /><anchor id="Pg28" />even one very much less. As they were not able to get
anything out of this piece of marble likely to be any
good, it seemed to Andrea del Monte a San Savino,
that he might obtain the block, and he asked them
to make him a present of it, promising that by joining
certain pieces on to it he would carve a figure from it;
but the Operai, before disposing of it, sent for Michael
Angelo, and told him the wish and offer of Andrea, and,
having heard his opinion that he could get something
good out of it, in the end they offered it to him. Michael
Angelo accepted it, and extracted the above-mentioned
statue without adding any other piece at all, so exactly
to size that the old surface of the outsides of the marble
may be seen on the top of the head and in the base. He
has left the same roughnesses in other of his works, as that
statue for the tomb of Pope Julius II., which represents
Contemplative Life. This is the custom of great masters,
lords of their art. But in the Giant it is more wonderful
than ever, because, besides not adding any pieces, he
amended the faults of the roughing out, an impossible
or, at least, a most difficult thing to do (as Michael Angelo
himself has said). He received four hundred ducats for
this work, and finished it in eighteen months.</p>

<p>XXII. In order that no copy of the Giant should
exist which was not his own handiwork, he had it cast in
bronze, of the size of the original, for his good friend Pier
Soderini, who sent it to France; and similarly he cast a
David with Goliath under him. The one to be seen in
the middle of the court-yard of the Palazzo de'Signori is
by Donatello, a man excellent in his art, and much praised
by Michael Angelo, except for one thing&mdash;he had not the
<pb n="29" /><anchor id="Pg29" />patience to properly polish his works; so that in the
distance they look admirable, but close to they lose their
quality. Michael Angelo also cast a bronze group of the
Madonna with her Son in her lap, which was sent into
Flanders<note place="foot"><p>The Madonna and Child in the church of Notre Dame at Bruges,
identified as this work, is in marble. Vasari also states that the work
for the Moscheroni, Merchants of Bruges, was a bronze, but both
accounts were written fifty years after the event. Albert Dürer saw
this work in the church and mentions it as a marble statue in his
"Netherlands Diary," 1520-21.</p></note> by certain Flemish merchants, the Moscheroni,
great people at home; they paid him one hundred ducats
for it. And, in order not altogether to give up painting,
he executed a round panel of Our Lady<note place="foot"><p>Now in the Tribuna of the Uffizi, Florence.</p></note> for Messer Agnolo
Doni, a Florentine citizen, for which he received seventy
ducats.</p>

<p>XXIII. It was some time since he had worked at that
art, having given himself up to the study of poets and
authors in the vulgar tongue and writing sonnets for his
own pleasure. After the death of Pope Alexander VI. he
was called to Rome by Pope Julius II., and received a
hundred ducats in Florence as his <hi rend="font-style: italic">viaticum</hi>. At this
time Michael Angelo was about twenty-nine years old;
for if we count from his birth in 1474, already stated, to
the death of the above Alexander, which was in 1503, we
shall find the number of years as given.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="30" /><anchor id="Pg30" /><head>CHAPTER IV</head>

<head type="sub">THE FIRST ACT OF THE TRAGEDY OF THE TOMB</head>

<p>XXIV. Coming then to Rome, many months<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo received payment for the cartoon probably in
Florence on February the 28th, 1505 ("Gaye," ii., p. 93), and he went
to Carrara in April of that year, so the delay was only two months, a
short enough time to prepare his great design.</p></note> passed
before Julius II. resolved in what way to employ him.
Ultimately it came into his head to get him to make his
monument. When he saw Michael Angelo's design it
pleased him so much that he at once sent him to Carrara
to quarry the necessary marbles, instructing Alamanno
Salviati, of Florence, to pay him a thousand ducats for
this purpose. Michael Angelo stayed in these mountains
more than eight months with two workmen and his horse,
and without any other salary except his food. One day
whilst he was there he saw a crag that overlooked the sea,
which made him wish to carve a colossus that would be a
landmark for sailors from a long way off, incited thereto
principally by the suitable shape of the rock from which
it could have been conveniently carved, and by emulation
of the ancients, who, perhaps with the same object as
Michael Angelo not to be idle, or for some other end, left
several records unfinished and sketched out, which give a
good idea of their powers. And of a surety he would
<pb n="31" /><anchor id="Pg31" />have done it if he had had time enough, or the business
upon which he had come had allowed him. He afterwards
much regretted not having carried it out. Enough
marbles quarried and chosen, he took them to the sea
coast and left one of his men to have them embarked. He
himself returned to Rome, and because he stopped some
days in Florence on the way, when he arrived at Rome he
found the first boat already at the Ripa<note place="foot"><p>The right bank of the Tiber below Rome. On the opposite shore
is the Marmorata, where blocks of marble were unloaded in the times of
the ancient Romans; some are there to this day.</p></note> unloading. He
had the blocks carried to the piazza of St. Peter's, behind
Santa Caterina, where he had his workshop near the Corridore.<note place="foot"><p>The covered way from the Vatican to the Castle of Saint Angelo.</p></note>
The quantity of marble was immense, so that,
spread over the piazza, they were the admiration of all
and a joy to the Pope, who heaped immeasurable favours
upon Michael Angelo; and when he began to work upon
them again and again went to see him at his house, and
talked with him of monuments and other matters as with
his own brother; and in order that he might more easily
go to him, the Pope ordered that a drawbridge should be
thrown across from the Corridore to the rooms of Michael
Angelo, by which he might visit him in private.</p>

<p>XXV. These many and frequent favours were the
cause (as often is the case at Court) of much envy, and,
after the envy, of endless persecution, since Bramante,
the architect, who was much loved by the Pope, made him
change his mind as to the monument by telling him, as is
said by the vulgar, that it is unlucky to build one's tomb
in one's lifetime. Fear as well as envy stimulated
<pb n="32" /><anchor id="Pg32" />Bramante, for the judgment of Michael Angelo had
exposed many of his errors. Bramante, as every one
knows, was given to all kinds of pleasures and a great
spendthrift. The pension allotted to him by the Pope,
however rich it might be, was not enough for him; he
tried to make money out of the works, building the walls
of bad materials, which, notwithstanding their greatness
and width, are not very firm or solid. As is manifest to
every one in the works of Saint Peter's, the Corridore di
Belvedere, the Convents di San Pietro ad Vincula, and
other fabrics built by him, it has been necessary to put
new foundations and to strengthen all of them by props
and buttresses, like buildings about to fall. Now because
he had no doubt that Michael Angelo knew these errors
of his, he always sought to remove him from Rome, or,
at least, to deprive him of the favour of the Pope, and of
the glory and usefulness that he might have acquired by
his industry. He succeeded in the matter of the tomb.
There is no doubt that if he had been allowed to finish it,
according to his first design,<note place="foot"><p>Heath Wilson estimates the area it would have covered as 34-1/2 ft.
by 23 ft. (p. 74).</p></note> having so large a field in
which to show his worth, no other artist, however celebrated
(be it said without envy), could have wrested from
him the high place he would have held. Those parts
which he did finish show what the rest would have been
like. The two slaves were done for this work: those who
have seen them declare that no such worthy statues were
ever carved.</p>

<p>XXVI. And to give some idea of it, I say briefly that
this tomb was to have had four faces, two of eighteen
<pb n="33" /><anchor id="Pg33" />braccia, that served for the flanks, so that it was to be a
square and a half in plan. All round about the outside
were niches for statues, and between niche and niche
terminal figures; to these were bound other statues, like
prisoners, upon certain square plinths, rising from the
ground and projecting from the monument. They represented
the liberal arts, as Painting, Sculpture, and
Architecture, each with her symbol so that they could
easily be recognised; denoting by this that, like Pope
Julius, all the virtues were the prisoners of Death, because
they would never find such favour and nourishment as he
gave them. Above these ran the cornice that tied all the
work together. On its plane were four great statues; one of
these, the Moses, may be seen in San Piero and Vincula. It
shall be spoken of in its proper place. So the work
mounted upward until it ended in a plane. Upon it were
two angels who supported an arc; one appeared to be
smiling as though he rejoiced that the soul of the Pope
had been received amongst the blessed spirits, the other
wept, as if sad that the world had been deprived of such a
man. Above one end was the entrance to the sepulchre in
a small chamber, built like a temple; in the middle was a
marble sarcophagus, where the body of the Pope was to
be buried; everything worked out with marvellous art.
Briefly, more than forty statues went to the whole work,
not counting the subjects in mezzo rilievo to be cast in
bronze, all appropriate in their stories and proclaiming
the acts of this great Pontiff.</p>

<p>XXVII. Having seen this design the Pope sent Michael
Angelo to Saint Peter's to decide where it might most
conveniently be erected. The church was in the form of
<pb n="34" /><anchor id="Pg34" />a cross. At the head Pope Nicolas V. had begun to rebuild
the tribune; the walls were already three braccia above
the ground when he died. It seemed to Michael Angelo
that this place was very suitable. When he returned to the
Pope he told him what he thought, and added, that if it
seemed good to his Holiness, it would be necessary to go
on with the building and roof it in. The Pope asked him,
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">What would be the cost of this?</hi>" Michael Angelo
replied, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">One hundred thousand scudi.</hi>" "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Let it be two
hundred thousand</hi>," said Julius. And sending San Gallo,
the architect, and Bramante to see the place, by their
suggestion it came into the mind of the Pope to rebuild
the church altogether. He directed them to prepare
designs, and that of Bramante was approved, as being
more graceful and better understood than the others.
Thus, Michael Angelo was the cause, both that those
parts of the building already begun were completed,
which otherwise might have remained as they were to
this day, and that it came into the mind of the Pope
to rebuild the rest of the church on a more magnificent
scale.</p>

<p>XXVIII. Returning to our story, Michael Angelo became
acquainted with the change in the wishes of Julius
in the following manner: The Pope instructed Michael
Angelo that if he needed money he was to come direct to
him and not to others, so that he might not have to go
from one to another for it. It happened one day that the
rest of the marbles that had been left at Carrara arrived
at the Ripa; Michael Angelo had them disembarked and
carried to Saint Peter's, and desiring at once to pay the
<pb n="35" /><anchor id="Pg35" />freight, the landing, and the porterage, he went to ask the
Pope for money, but found access to the palace more
difficult than usual, and his Holiness occupied. So he
returned home, and not to incommode the poor men who
had earned their wages he paid them all out of his own
pocket, thinking that his money would be returned by the
Pope at a more convenient season. One morning he
returned and entered the ante-chamber for an audience.
A groom came up to him and said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Pardon me, I have
been ordered not to admit you</hi>." A bishop was present,
and hearing the words of the man, cried out: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You cannot
know who this man is?</hi>" "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I know him very well</hi>,"
replied the groom, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">but I am obliged to do what I am
bid by my masters without further question</hi>." Michael
Angelo, who had never before been kept waiting or had
the door barred against him, seeing himself so turned off
and scorned, was angered and replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You may tell
the Pope that, henceforward, if he wants me he must look
for me elsewhere</hi>." So he returned to his house and instructed
his two servants to sell all his furniture, and when
they got the money to follow him to Florence. He himself
took horse and at the second hour of the night reached
Poggibonsi, a castle in the Florentine territory, eighteen
or twenty miles from the city, where, as in a safe place, he
rested.</p>

<p>XXIX. A little later five messengers from Pope Julius
arrived with orders to bring Michael Angelo back wherever
they might find him. But overtaking him in a place
where they were unable to offer him any violence,
Michael Angelo threatening them with death if they
<pb n="36" /><anchor id="Pg36" />dare lay hands on him, they turned to entreaties; then
not succeeding, they obtained from him the concession
that at least he would reply to the letter from the
Pope which they had given to him, and that he should
particularly write that they had only overtaken him
in Florence that the Pope might understand that they
were unable to bring him back against his will. The
letter of the Pope was of this tenour: "At sight of
this return immediately to Rome, under pain of my
displeasure." Michael Angelo replied briefly: "That he
was never going to return, and that his good and faithful
service had not deserved this change, to be hunted away
from his presence like a rogue; and as his Holiness did
not wish to have anything more to do with the tomb, he
was free and did not wish to bind himself again." So
dating the letter as has been said he let the messengers
go, he himself went on to Florence, where, during the
three months he remained there, three Briefs were sent to
the Signoria, full of menaces, demanding that he should be
sent back either by fair means or force.</p>

<p>XXX. Pier Soderini, who was then Gonfaloniere of
the Republic for life, having formerly let him go to Rome
much against his will, wished him to work for him by
painting in the Sala del Consiglio. On receipt of the first
Brief he did not oblige Michael Angelo to return, hoping
that the anger of the Pope would abate; but when a
second and a third arrived, he called Michael Angelo to
him and said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You have braved the Pope as the King
of France would not have done, therefore prayer is unavailing.
We do not wish to go to war with him on your
<pb n="37" /><anchor id="Pg37" />account and risk the State, so prepare yourself to return</hi>."<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo fled from Rome during the week after Easter, 1506.
He relates the circumstances in a letter of October 1542, No. c. d. xxxv.
"Le Lettere p. 489," which corroborates Condivi's story word for word,
and is another proof of the autobiographical nature of these memoirs.</p></note>
Michael Angelo, seeing it had come to this, and fearing
the wrath of the Pope, thought of going to the Levant,
principally because he had been sought after by the Turk
with rich promises, through the agency of certain Franciscan
Friars, to throw a bridge from Constantinople to
Pera, and for other works. But the Gonfaloniere, hearing
of this, sent for him and dissuaded him, saying: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">That it
was better to die with the Pope than to live with the Turk;
nevertheless, there was nothing to fear, for the Pope was
kind, and sent for him because he loved him well, not
because he wished him harm; and if he was still afraid, the
Signoria would send him as ambassador, because violence
was not offered to public persons without it being offered
to those who sent them.</hi>" By reason of these and other
arguments Michael Angelo prepared to return.</p>

<p>XXXI. Whilst he was still in Florence two things
happened. One was that he finished the marvellous
cartoon he had begun for the Sala del Consiglio, which
represented the war between Florence and Pisa, and the
many and various events that occurred in it, which cartoon
of consummate art was a light to all those who
afterwards took pencil in hand. I cannot tell what evil
fortune happened to it afterwards, it was left by Michael
Angelo in the Sala del Papa (a place so called in Florence)
at Santa Maria Novella. Fragments of it can be seen in
<pb n="38" /><anchor id="Pg38" />the various places, preserved with greatest care like something
sacred.<note place="foot"><p>No fragments of this cartoon remain; perhaps the best copy is
that in possession of the Earl of Leicester at Holkham Hall. See also
p. 124.</p></note> The other thing was, that Pope Julius had
taken Bologna and had gone there; he was delighted
with the acquisition, and this gave courage to Michael
Angelo to appear before him more hopefully.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="39" /><anchor id="Pg39" /><head>CHAPTER V</head>

<head type="sub">THE COLOSSAL BRONZE FOR THE FAÇADE OF
SAN PETRONIO</head>

<p>XXXII. So he arrived at Bologna one morning, and
going to San Petronio to hear mass,<note place="foot"><p>Like the good Catholic he was, he went to hear mass as soon as
he had completed his journey; he always behaved as a good son of the
Church.</p></note> behold, the grooms
of the Pope, who recognised him and conducted him to
his Holiness, who was at table in the Palazzo de' Sedici.
When he saw Michael Angelo in his presence, Julius, with
an angry look, said to him, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You ought to have come to
us, and you have waited for us to come to you</hi>." Meaning
to say, that his Holiness being come to Bologna, a place
much nearer to Florence than Rome is, it was as if he (the
Pope) had come to him. Michael Angelo with a loud
voice and on his knees craved pardon, pleading that he
had not erred maliciously but through indignation, for he
could not bear to be hunted away as he had been. The
Pope kept his head lowered and replied nothing, to all
appearances much troubled, when a certain monsignore,
sent by the Cardinal Soderini to excuse and intercede for
Michael Angelo, broke in, saying: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Your Holiness, do
not remember his fault, for he has erred through
ignorance; these painters in things outside their art are
all like this.</hi>" The Pope indignantly replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You
<pb n="40" /><anchor id="Pg40" />abuse him, whilst we say nothing; you are the ignorant
one, and he is not the culprit; take yourself off in an evil
hour.</hi>" But as he was not going, he was, as Michael
Angelo used to tell, hustled out of the room with blows
by the servants of the Pope. Thus the Pope having spent
his fury on the bishop, called Michael Angelo closer to
him, and pardoned him, ordering him not to leave Bologna
until another commission had been given to him. Nor
was he long before he sent for him and said that he
wished Michael Angelo to make a great portrait statue of
him in bronze, which he wished to place on the front of
the Church of San Petronio. And he left a thousand
ducats in the bank of Messer Antommaria da Lignano to
carry out the work when he departed for Rome. It is true
that before he left Michael Angelo had already modelled
it in clay, but he was doubtful as to what the statue
should hold in the left hand, the right was raised as if
giving a benediction. He asked the Pope, who had come
to see the statue, if it pleased him that he should be
made holding a book. "<hi rend="font-style: italic">What! a book?</hi>" he replied, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">a
sword! As for me, I am no scholar.</hi>" And jesting about
the right hand, which was in vigorous action, he said,
smiling the while, to Michael Angelo, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Does this statue of
yours give a blessing or a curse?</hi>" Michael Angelo replied
to him: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">It threatens this people, Holy Father, lest they be
foolish.</hi>" But, as I have said, Pope Julius returned to
Rome and Michael Angelo remained behind at Bologna,
and spent sixteen months in completing the statue and
erecting it where the Pope had directed. Afterwards, on
the return of the Bentivogli to Bologna, this statue was
thrown to earth in the fury of the populace and destroyed.
Its height was more than three times that of life.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="41" /><anchor id="Pg41" /><head>CHAPTER VI</head>

<head type="sub">THE VAULT OF THE SISTINE CHAPEL</head>

<p>XXXIII. After he had finished this work he went to
Rome, where Pope Julius wished to employ him, keeping
still to his purpose of not going on with his tomb. It was
put into his head by Bramante and other rivals of Michael
Angelo that he should make him paint the vault of the
chapel of Sixtus the Fourth, in the Vatican, making him
believe that he would do wonders. This was done
maliciously, to distract the Pope from works of sculpture;
and because they thought it was certain, either, that by his
not accepting such a commission, he would stir up the
Pope's anger against himself, or that by accepting it he
would come out of it very much inferior to Raffaello da
Urbino, whom they heaped with favours on account of
their hatred for Michael Angelo, judging that his principal
art was sculpture, as in truth it was. Michael Angelo,
who as yet had never used colours and knew the painting
of the vault to be a very difficult undertaking, tried with
all his power to get out of it, proposing Raffaello and
excusing himself, in that it was not his art and that he
would not succeed, refusing so many demands that the
Pope was almost in a passion. But seeing his obstinacy,
Michael Angelo set himself to do the work, which to-day
is seen in the palace of the Pope, and is the admiration and
<pb n="42" /><anchor id="Pg42" />wonder of the world; it brought him so much fame that it
lifted him above all envy. I will give some brief account of
this work.</p>

<p>XXXIV. The shape of this ceiling is what is commonly
called a barrel vaulting, resting on lunettes, six to the
length and two to the width of the building, so that the
whole formed two squares and a half. In this space
Michael Angelo has depicted, firstly, the creation of the
world, and then almost the whole of the Old Testament.
He has divided the work after this fashion: Beginning
at the brackets, where the horns of the lunettes rest, up to
almost a third of the arch of the vault, the walls appear
to continue flat, running up to that height with certain
pilasters and plinths imitating marble, which project into
the open like a balustrade over an additional storey, with
corbels below, and with other little pilasters above the
same storey, where sit the prophets and sybils. The
first pilasters grow from the arches of the lunettes, placing
the pedestals in the middle, leaving, however, the greater
part of the arch of the lunette&mdash;that is to say, the space
they contain between them. Above the said plinths are
painted some little naked children in various poses, who,
in guise of terminals, support a cornice, which binds the
whole work together, leaving in the middle of the vault
from end to end, as it were, the open sky. This opening
is divided into nine spaces; for from the cornices over the
pilasters spring certain arches with cornices, which traverse
the highest part of the vault, and join the cornice on the
opposite side of the chapel, leaving from arch to arch nine
openings, large and small. In the smaller spaces are two
fillets, painted like marble that cross the opening in such
<pb n="43" /><anchor id="Pg43" />a way that in the middle rest the two parts and one of
the bands, where medallions are placed, as shall be told in due
course; and this has been done to avoid monotony, which is
born of sameness. Now, at the head of the chapel, in the
first opening, which is one of the smaller ones, is seen
how the Omnipotent God in the heavens by the movement
of His arms divides light from darkness. In the second
space is how He created the two great lights. The
Creator is seen with arms extended: with the right He
lights the sun, and with the left the moon. With Him are
child-angels; one on the left hides his face against the
bosom of his Creator, as though shielding himself from
the harmful light of the moon. In the same space on the
left God is seen turning to create the trees and plants of
the earth, painted with such art that wherever you turn
He appears to turn away also, showing the whole of the
back down to the soles of His feet&mdash;a thing most beautiful,
and which shows what may be done by foreshortening.
In the third space the great God appears in the heavens,
again with a company of angels, looking upon the waters
and commanding them to bring forth all those forms of
life nourished in that element, just as in the second He
commands the earth. In the fourth is the creation of
Man. God is seen with arm and hand stretched forth as
if giving His commandments to Adam, what to do and
what not to do; with His other arm He draws His angels
about Him. In the fifth is how He drew woman from
the side of Adam. She comes forth with her hands joined,
raising them in prayer towards God, bending with gracious
mien and offering thanks as He blesses her. In the sixth
is how the Devil tempted man. From the middle upwards
the wicked one is of human form, and the rest of him like
<pb n="44" /><anchor id="Pg44" />unto a serpent, his legs transformed into tails winding
around a tree. He seems to reason with the man and
persuade him to act contrary to the commands of his
Creator, and he offers the forbidden apple to the woman.
On the other side of the space the two are seen driven
forth by the angel, terrified and weeping, flying from the
face of God. In the seventh is the sacrifice of Abel and
of Cain;<note place="foot"><p>This composition is generally known as the "Sacrifice of Noah,"
see p. 172. Condivi evidently did not refer these descriptions to the
master, they are so full of curious individualities of his own.</p></note> the one grateful to and accepted by God, the
other hateful and refused. In the eighth is the Deluge,
when the ark of Noah is seen in the distance in the midst
of the waters; some men attempt to cling to it for safety.
Nearer, in the same abyss of waters, is a boat laden with
many people, which, both by the excessive weight she has
to carry and by the many and tumultuous lashings of the
waves, loses her sail, and, deprived of every aid and
human control, she is already filling with water and going
to the bottom. It is an admirable thing to see the human
race so wretchedly perishing in the waves. Likewise,
nearer to the eye, there still appears above the waters the
summit of a mountain, like unto an island, on which,
fleeing from the rising waters, collect a multitude of men
and women, who exhibit different expressions, but all
wretched and all terrified, dragging themselves beneath a
curtain stretched over a tree to shelter them from the
unusual rains; and above them is represented with great
art the anger of God, which overwhelms them with water,
with lightnings, and with thunderbolts. There is also
another mountain-top on the right,<note place="foot"><p>That is the picture right.</p></note> much nearer the eye,
<pb n="45" /><anchor id="Pg45" />and a multitude labouring under the same disasters, of
which it would be long to write all the details; it shall
suffice me to say that they are all very natural and
tremendous, just as one would imagine them in such a
convulsion. In the ninth, which is the last, is the story
of Noah when he was drunken with wine, lying on the
ground, his shame derided by his son Ham and covered by
Shem and Japhet. Under the before-mentioned cornice
which finishes the walls, and above the brackets where the
lunettes rest, between pilaster and pilaster, sit twelve large
figures&mdash;prophets and sybils&mdash;all truly wonderful, as much
for their grace as for the decoration and design of their
draperies. But admirable above all the others is the
prophet Jonah, placed at the head of the vault, because
contrary to the form of this part of the ceiling, by
force of light and shade, the torso, which is foreshortened
so that it goes back away into the roof, is on the part of
the arch nearest the eye, and the feet and legs which, as
it were, project within the walls, are on the part more
distant. A stupendous performance, which shows what
marvellous power was in this man of turning lines in
foreshortening and perspective. Now in the spaces that
are below the lunettes, as well as in those above, which
have a triangular shape, are painted all the genealogy,
or, I should say, all the ancestors of the Saviour, except
the triangles at the corners, which come together, and so,
two make up one of double the area. In one then of
these, above the wall of the Last Judgment on the right
hand,<note place="foot"><p>The picture right, <hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, the spectator's left.</p></note> is seen how Aman, by command of King Ahasuerus,
was hung upon a cross; and this was because, in his pride
and arrogance, he wished to hang Mordecai, the uncle
<pb n="46" /><anchor id="Pg46" />Queen Ester, for not honouring him with a reverence as he
passed by. In another corner is the story of the bronze
serpent, lifted by Moses on a staff, in which the children of
Israel, wounded and ill-treated by lively little serpents,
are healed by looking up. Here Michael Angelo has
shown admirable force in those figures that are struggling
to free themselves from the coils of the serpents. In the
third corner, at the lower end of the chapel, is the
vengeance wreaked upon Holofernes by Judith, and in
the fourth that of David over Goliath. And these are
briefly all the histories.</p>

<p>XXXV. But no less marvellous is that part which does
not relate to the histories at all, that is to say, certain
nudes who sit upon plinths above the before-mentioned
cornice, one on either side holding up the medallions, which,
as has been said, appear to be of metal, on which, in the
style of reverses, are designed several stories, all however
appropriate to their principal histories. By the beauty of
the divisions, by the variety of the poses, and by the balance
of the proportionate parts, in all of them Michael Angelo
exhibited the highest art. But to tell the particulars of
these things would be an infinite labour, a book to them
alone would not be enough; therefore I pass over them
briefly, wishing rather to give a little light upon the whole
than to detail the parts.</p>

<p>XXXVI. In the meanwhile he did not lack troubles;
for, having finished the picture of the Deluge, the work
began to grow mouldy,<note place="foot"><p>"To bloom," as a painter of to-day would say.</p></note> so much so that the figures could
hardly be distinguished. Michael Angelo, thinking that
<pb n="47" /><anchor id="Pg47" />this excuse would suffice to enable him to shake off his
burden, went to the Pope and said to him: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I have already
told your Holiness that this is not my art; all that I have
done is spoiled; if you do not believe it send and see.</hi>" The
Pope sent Il San Gallo, who, when he examined the fresco,
saw that the plaster had been applied too wet, and the
dampness running down caused this effect; and informing
Michael Angelo of this he made him proceed, and the
excuse was unavailing.</p>

<p>XXXVII. Whilst he was painting Pope Julius went
to see the work many times, ascending the scaffolding by a
ladder, Michael Angelo giving him his hand to assist him
on to the highest platform. And, like one who was of a
vehement nature, and impatient of delay, when but one
half of the work was done, the part from the door to the
middle of the vault,<note place="foot"><p>See p. 163.</p></note> he insisted upon having it uncovered,
although it was still incomplete and had not received the
finishing touches. Michael Angelo's fame, and the expectation
they had of him, drew the whole of Rome to the
chapel, where the Pope also rushed, even before the dust
raised by the taking down the scaffolding had settled.</p>

<p>XXXVIII. After this, Raphael, having seen this new
and marvellous manner as one who excelled in imitating,
tried by the aid of Bramante to get the rest of the chapel
to paint. Michael Angelo was much troubled, came
before the Pope, and bitterly complained of the injury
Bramante was doing him; and in his presence grieved over
it with the Pope, discovering to him all the persecution
he had suffered from him, and afterwards unfolded to him
<pb n="48" /><anchor id="Pg48" />many of Bramante's shortcomings, principally that in
pulling down the old church of Saint Peter's he threw to
earth those marvellous columns that were therein, not
respecting them or caring whether they were broken to
pieces or not, when he might have lowered them gently and
preserved them whole; explaining how it was an easy thing
to pile brick on brick, but to make such a column was most
difficult, and many other things that it was most necessary
to relate; so that the Pope, hearing of all these sad doings,
willed that Michael Angelo should continue the work,
showing him more favour than ever. He finished all this
work in twenty months<note place="foot"><p>See pp. 147-165 and 183. The first half may be estimated to have
taken eight months and a few days, and the second half from January
1510 to October 1512, with intervals for journeys to Florence, to Bologna,
and other interruptions.</p></note> without assistance,<note place="foot"><p>That is professional assistance by artists or pupils. Workmen
were employed to plaster each day's section of work, writers to do the
lettering, and even decorative workmen for architectural details.</p></note> not even
any one to grind the colours. It is true that I have heard
him say that the work is not finished as he would have
wished, as he was prevented by the hurry of the Pope,
who demanded of him one day when he would finish the
chapel. Michael Angelo said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">When I can</hi>." The
Pope, angered, added: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Do you want me to have you
thrown down off this scaffolding?</hi>" Michael Angelo, hearing
this, said to himself: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Nay, you shall not have me
thrown down</hi>," and as soon as the Pope had gone away he
had the scaffolding taken down and uncovered his work
upon All Saints Day. It was seen with great satisfaction
by the Pope (who that very day visited the chapel), and all
Rome crowded to admire it. It lacked the retouches "a
secco" of ultramarine and of gold in certain places, which
<pb n="49" /><anchor id="Pg49" />would have made it appear more rich. Julius, his fervour
having abated, wished that Michael Angelo should supply
them; but he considering the business it would be to reerect
the scaffolding, replied that there was nothing important
wanting. "<hi rend="font-style: italic">It should be touched with gold</hi>," replied the
Pope. Michael Angelo said to him familiarly, as he had
a way of doing with his Holiness: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I do not see that men
wear gold.</hi>" The Pope again said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">It will seem poor</hi>."
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Those who are painted here were poor also</hi>," Michael
Angelo replied. This he threw out in jest; but so the
vault has remained. Michael Angelo received for this
work and all his expenses three thousand ducats, of which
I have heard him say he spent in colours about twenty or
twenty-five.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="50" /><anchor id="Pg50" /><head>CHAPTER VII</head>

<head type="sub">THE RISEN CHRIST OF THE MINERVA</head>

<p>XXXIX. When he had finished this work Michael
Angelo, because he had painted so long a time with his
eyes turned upwards towards the vault, could hardly see
anything when looking down, so that when he had to read
a letter or look at a minute object it was necessary for
him to hold it above his head. Nevertheless, little by
little, he became able to again read looking down. By
this we are able to judge with how much attention and
assiduity he had carried out his work. Many other
things happened to him during the life of Pope Julius,
who loved him from his heart, having a more jealous care
for him than for any one else he had about him, as one
may see clearly by what we have already written. Indeed,
one day fearing that Michael Angelo was angry, he
immediately sent to pacify him. It happened in this
wise. Michael Angelo wanting to go to Florence for
Saint John's Day asked the Pope for money; and he
demanded when his chapel would be finished. Michael
Angelo, as his custom was, replied, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">When I can</hi>." The
Pope, who was of a hasty nature, struck him with a stick
that he had in his hand, saying: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">When I can, indeed;
when I can!</hi>" After he got home Michael Angelo was
preparing, without more ado, to go to Florence, when
<pb n="51" /><anchor id="Pg51" />Accursio arrived, a highly favoured young man, sent by
the Pope, and brought him five hundred ducats and
pacified him as best he could, making the Pope's excuses.
Michael Angelo accepted the apology and went away to
Florence. So that it seems as if Julius cared more than
for anything else to keep this man for himself; nor was
he contented with his services during his life only, but
required them after his death; wherefore coming to die
he commanded that the Tomb which Michael Angelo had
formerly begun should be finished for him, giving this
charge to the old Cardinal Santi Quattro and the Cardinal
Aginense, his nephew: they, however, had new designs
prepared, the first appearing to them too large. So
Michael Angelo again became involved in the Tragedy of
the Tomb, which had no better success than at first; on
the contrary much worse, it brought him infinite vexations,
troubles, and labours; and, what is worse, by the
malice of certain men, shame, from which he was hardly
able to clear himself for many years. Michael Angelo then
began all over again and set to work. He brought many
masters from Florence, and Bernardo Bini, who was
trustee, provided the money as he needed it. But it had
not got on very far when he was interrupted, much to his
disgust, for it came into the head of the Pope Leo, who had
succeeded Julius, to ornament the façade of San Lorenzo,
in Florence, with sculpture and marble work. This was the
church built by the great Cosimo de' Medici; and, except
for the façade mentioned above, was all completely
finished. This part, then, Pope Leo resolved to supply.
He thought of employing Michael Angelo, and sending
for him he made him prepare a design, and finally on
that account wished him to go to Florence and take upon
<pb n="52" /><anchor id="Pg52" />himself all this charge. Michael Angelo, who was working
with love and diligence at the tomb of Julius, made all
the resistance that he could, saying that he was bound to
Cardinal Santi Quattro and to Aginense, and could not
fail them. But the Pope, who was determined in this
matter, replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Leave me to deal with them; I will
content them.</hi>" So he sent for both of them and made
them release Michael Angelo, much to the sorrow both of
himself and the Cardinals, especially of Aginense, nephew,
as has been said, of Pope Julius, for whom, however,
Pope Leo promised that Michael Angelo should work in
Florence, and that he would not hinder him. In this
fashion, weeping, Michael Angelo left the tomb and
betook himself to Florence. As soon as he arrived he
put everything in order for building the façade, he himself
went to Carrara to transport marbles, not only for the
façade but also for the tomb, relying upon the promise
of the Pope that he would be able to go on with it. In
the meantime the Pope was informed that in the mountains
of Pietrasanta, in the Florentine territory, there were
marbles as good and beautiful as at Carrara. When this
was discussed with Michael Angelo, he, as a friend of the
Marchese Alberigo, and having come to an understanding
with him about the marbles, preferred rather to quarry at
Carrara than at these new places in the State of Florence.
The Pope wrote to Michael Angelo and commanded him
to go to Pietrasanta and see if it was as he heard from
Florence. He went there and found the marble very
unmanageable and unsuitable;<note place="foot"><p>These quarries are in the Alpi Apuane near Viareggio, we are
informed by a modern Florentine sculptor that this marble is of
excellent quality.</p></note> and even if it had been
<pb n="53" /><anchor id="Pg53" />suitable, it would be a difficult and very expensive business
to bring it down to the sea; for it would require a new
road to be constructed for several miles over the mountains
with pickaxes, and across the plains, which were very
marshy, on piles. Michael Angelo wrote all this to the
Pope; but he rather believed those who had written to
him from Florence, and ordered him to make the road.
So to carry out the will of the Pope he constructed this
road,<note place="foot"><p>See pp. 183-185.</p></note> and by it carried a vast quantity of marble to the
sea coast, amongst them five columns of the right size;
one of them is to be seen on the Piazza of San Lorenzo,
brought by him to Florence;<note place="foot"><p>This column was still lying in the Piazza of San Lorenzo in 1888;
it has now been removed.</p></note> the other four, because the
Pope had changed his mind and turned his thoughts elsewhere,
are still lying on the sea shore. But the Marchese
di Carrara, thinking that Michael Angelo, as a citizen of
Florence, might have been the originator of the quarrying
at Pietrasanta, became his enemy; nor would he allow
him to return to Carrara afterwards even for marble that
he had already quarried, which was a great loss to
Michael Angelo.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="54" /><anchor id="Pg54" /><head>CHAPTER VIII</head>

<head type="sub">THE SACRISTY OF SAN LORENZO</head>

<p>XL. Now having returned to Florence, and finding, as
was said before, that the fervour of Pope Leo was all
spent, Michael Angelo, grieving, remained there doing
nothing for a long while, having, first in one thing and
then in another, thrown away much of his time, to his
great annoyance. Nevertheless, with certain blocks of
marble that he had placed in his own house, he proceeded
with the work of the Tomb. But Leo departing this life,
Adrian was created Pope, and the work was interrupted
again, for they charged Michael Angelo with having
received from Julius for this work quite sixteen thousand
scudi, and that he did not trouble himself to get on with
it, but stayed at Florence for his own pleasure. All these
accusations called for his presence in Rome; but the
Cardinal de' Medici, who afterwards became Pope
Clement VII., and who then had the government of
Florence in his hand, did not wish him to go; and to
keep him employed, and to have an excuse, he made him
begin the Medici Library in San Lorenzo, and at the same
time the sacristy with the tombs of his ancestors, promising
to satisfy the Pope for him, and arrange matters.
Then Adrian living only a few months and Clement
succeeding him in the Papacy, nothing more was said
<pb n="55" /><anchor id="Pg55" />about the Tomb of Julius for some time. But Michael
Angelo was advised that the Duke of Urbino, Francesco
Maria, nephew of Pope Julius of happy memory, complained
greatly of him, and menaced him with vengeance
if he did not quickly come to Rome. Michael Angelo
conferred with Pope Clement about the affair, and he
counselled him to call the agents of the Duke and prepare
an account with them of all that he had received from
Julius and all the work he had done for him, knowing that
if Michael Angelo's work were properly estimated he would
turn out to be the creditor rather than the debtor.
Michael Angelo remained in Rome about this against
his will; and having arranged affairs returned to Florence,
principally because he anticipated the ruin that a little
while afterwards came upon Rome.</p>

<p>XLI. In the meantime the House of Medici was driven
out of Florence by the opposing faction, because they had
taken more authority to themselves than could be suffered
in a free city that ruled herself by her Republic. As the
Signoria did not expect that the Pope would do anything
to forego his family's authority they expected certain war,
and turned their minds to the fortifications of their city,
and appointed Michael Angelo Commissary-General for
that work. He then, accepting this preferment, besides
many other preparations carried out by him on every side
of the city, encircled with strong fortifications the hill of
San Miniato, that stands above the city and overlooks the
surrounding plain. If the enemy took this hill nothing
could prevent him becoming master of the city also. This
fort was judged to be the saving of the country, and very
dangerous to the enemy; being, as I have said, of high
<pb n="56" /><anchor id="Pg56" />elevation, it menaced the hosts of their antagonists,
especially from the bell-tower of the church, where two
pieces of artillery were placed, which continually did great
damage to the besiegers. Michael Angelo, notwithstanding
that he had made provision beforehand for whatever
might occur, posted himself upon the hill. After about
six months the soldiers began to grumble amongst themselves
of I know not what treachery; Michael Angelo
partly knowing about this himself, and partly by the
warnings of certain captains, his friends, betook himself
to the Signoria and discovered to them what he had heard
and seen, showing them in what danger the city stood,
saying that there was yet time to provide against the
danger, if they would. But instead of thanking him they
abused him, and reproached him with being a timid man
and too suspicious. He who replied to him thus had
better have opened his ears to him, for the House of
Medici entered into Florence and his head was cut off;
whereas, if he had listened, he might have been yet alive.</p>

<p>XLII. When Michael Angelo saw how little his word
was considered, and how the ruin of the city was certain, by
the authority he had he caused a gate to be opened, and went
out with two of his people, and betook himself to Venice.
And certainly this notion of a treachery was no fable; but
he who arranged it judged that it would pass over with
less disgrace if it was not discovered just then, as time
would achieve the same result by his merely failing in his
duty and hindering others who wished to do theirs. The
departure of Michael Angelo was the occasion of many
rumours, and he fell into great disgrace with the governors.
All the same, he was recalled with many prayers, with
<pb n="57" /><anchor id="Pg57" />appeals to his patriotism, and by those who urged that he
must not abandon the responsibilities that he had taken
upon himself, and that the matter was not at such an
extremity as he had been given to understand, and many
other things. Persuaded by all this, and by the authority
of the personages who wrote to him, but chiefly by his love
for his country, after he had received a safe conduct for
ten days before the day of his arrival in Florence, he
returned, not without danger to his life.</p>

<p>XLIII. Again in Florence the first thing he did was
to protect the bell-tower of San Miniato, which was all
broken by the continual cannonading of the enemy, and
had become very dangerous to those within. The method
of defence was in this wise: a large number of mattresses,
well filled with wool, were slung with stout cords from the
top of the tower to the bottom, covering parts likely to
be hit. And as the cornice projected considerably, the
mattresses hung out from the main wall of the bell-tower
more than six hands, so that the cannon-balls of the
enemy, partly on account of the distance from which they
were fired, and partly by the opposition of these mattresses,
did little or no damage, not even injuring the mattresses
themselves, because they were so yielding. Thus he held
that tower all the time of the siege, which lasted a year,
without its suffering any injury, and rejoicing greatly in
the salvation of the land and the damage he did to the
enemy.</p>

<p>XLIV. But afterwards the enemy entered the city by
treachery, and many of the citizens were taken and killed.
The court sent to the house of Michael Angelo to seize
<pb n="58" /><anchor id="Pg58" />him; all the rooms and the chests were searched by them,
even to the chimney and closet; but Michael Angelo,
afraid of what might follow, had taken refuge in the house
of a great friend. Here he remained in hiding many days,
no one knowing that he was there except the friend who
saved him. When the fury was over, Pope Clement wrote
to Florence that Michael Angelo must be sought out, and
ordered that, when found, he should be set at liberty if he
would go on with the work of the Medici tombs formerly
begun, and that he must be used courteously. Michael
Angelo, hearing this, came out; and, although it was some
fifteen years since he had touched the chisel, yet he set
himself so earnestly to his task that in a few months he
carved all the statues now to be seen in the sacristy of San
Lorenzo, urged on more by fear than by love.<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo's love for Lorenzo the Magnificent never abated,
and these tombs may be regarded as a tribute to his early patron's
memory. He worked upon them in secret during the siege itself.</p></note> It is true
that none of these statues have received their last touches;
nevertheless, they are carried so far that the excellence of
the workmanship can be very well seen; nor does the lack
of finish impair the perfection and the beauty of the
work.</p>

<p>XLV. The statues are four, placed in a sacristy erected
for this purpose on the left of the church opposite the old
sacristy; and although each figure balances the other in
design and general shape, nevertheless, they are quite
different in form, idea, and action. The sarcophagi are placed
against the side walls, and above their lids recline two
figures, larger than life&mdash;that is to say, a man and a woman,
signifying Day and Night; and by the two of them Time,
<pb n="59" /><anchor id="Pg59" />that consumes all things. And in order that his idea
might be better understood, he gave to the Night, who was
made in the form of a woman of a marvellous beauty, an
owl and other symbols suitable to her; similarly to the Day,
his signs; and for the signification of Time he intended to
carve a rat, because this little animal gnaws and consumes,
just as Time devours, all things. He left a piece of marble
on the work for it, which he did not carve, as he was
afterwards prevented. There were besides other statues,
which represented those for whom the tombs were erected.
All, in conclusion, were more divine than human; but
above all, the Madonna, with her little child straddling
across her thigh, of this I judge it better to be silent than
to say but little, and so I pass it by.<note place="foot"><p>Condivi had not seen this sacristy and described it merely from
the fragmentary recollections of the master.</p></note> We owe thanks to
Pope Clement for these masterpieces; and if he had done
no other praiseworthy act in his life (but, of course, he did
many), this one was enough to cancel all his faults, for
through him the world possesses these noble statues. And
much more we owe him in that he did not fail to respect
the virtue of this man when Florence fell, just as in olden
times Marcellus respected the virtue of Archimedes when
he entered Syracuse, although in that case it was of no
effect; in this case, thanks be to God, it availed much.</p>

<p>XLVI. For all that Michael Angelo lived in great fear,
because he was greatly disliked by the Duke Alessandro, a
young man, as every one knows, very fierce and vindictive.
There is no doubt that, if it had not been for the fear of
the Pope, he would have had him put away long ago; the
more so, as this Duke of Florence, when erecting those
<pb n="60" /><anchor id="Pg60" />fortresses of his, sent for Michael Angelo, by Signor
Alessandro Vitelli, to ride out with him and indicate where
they would most usefully be placed, and he would not,
replying that he had received no such commission from
Pope Clement. The Duke was much angered; so that for
this reason, as well as for the old ill-will he bore him, and
on account of the nature of the Duke, Michael Angelo had
good reason to fear him. And truly it was a blessing of God
that he was not in Florence at the time of the death of
Clement; he was called to Rome by the Pontiff before he had
quite finished the tombs at San Lorenzo. He was received
gladly. Clement respected this man like one sacred, and
talked with him familiarly, both on grave and trivial
subjects, as he would have done with his equals. He
sought to relieve him of the burden of the Tomb of Julius,
so that he might settle in Florence permanently, not only
to finish the works already begun, but that he might
execute others no less worthy.</p>

<p>XLVII. But before I say any more about this it behoves
me to write of another fact concerning Michael Angelo,
which I have inadvertently omitted. After the violent
departure of the Medici from Florence, the Signoria fearing,
as I have said above, the coming war, and intending
to fortify their city, sent for Michael Angelo, as they knew
him to be a man of consummate ingenuity and most active
in whatever he undertook; nevertheless, by the advice of
certain citizens who favoured the cause of the Medici and
wished covertly to hinder or delay the fortification of the
city, they sent him to Ferrara, under pretext that he should
study the system by which Duke Alfonso had armed and
fortified his city, knowing that his Excellency was most
<pb n="61" /><anchor id="Pg61" />expert in these matters and in everything else most prudent.
The Duke received Michael Angelo gladly, not only for the
great worthiness of the man, but also because Don Ercole,
his son and now Duke in his stead, was Captain of the
Signoria of Florence. The Duke riding with him in person
there was nothing that he did not show him, even more
than was needful, so many bastions, so many pieces of
artillery, and, indeed, he opened to him his cabinet also
and showed him everything with his own hands, especially
certain works of painting and portraits of his ancestors, by
masters excellent in their day.<note place="foot"><p>Possibly in the Duke's collection there may have been an antique
gem engraved with the story of Leda which influenced Michael Angelo
in his choice of this classical subject for the picture he painted for the
Duke.</p></note> But when Michael Angelo
had to depart, the Duke said to him jestingly: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Michael
Angelo, you are my prisoner. If you want me to let you
go free you must promise to do some work for me with your
own hands, whatever suits you best, let it be what you will,
sculpture or painting.</hi>" Michael Angelo agreed, and returned
to Florence. Although much occupied in arming the
country, yet he began a large easel picture, representing
Leda and the Swan, and near by the egg from which Castor
and Pollux were born, as is fabled by ancient writers.
When the Duke heard that the Medici had entered
Florence, fearing to lose so great a treasure in the tumult,
he immediately sent one of his own people. His man, when
he came to the house of Michael Angelo and saw the
picture, said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Why! this is but a small matter.</hi>" Michael
Angelo asked him what his business was? Realising that
every one thinks they know other people's business best, he
replied simpering, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I am a merchant</hi>;" perhaps disgusted by
<pb n="62" /><anchor id="Pg62" />such a question, and not being taken for a gentleman,
while at the same time despising the industry of the
Florentine citizens, who for the most part are merchants,
as if he had said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You ask what is my business, would you
ever believe that I am a merchant?</hi>" Michael Angelo heard
what he said, and replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You have done bad business for
your lord; leave my sight.</hi>" So having dismissed the Ducal
messenger, he gave the picture shortly afterwards to one
of his assistants, who had two sisters to marry off. It was
sent into France, where it still is,<note place="foot"><p>The best version of this picture is in one the offices of the National
Gallery, London; it is probably the much restored original which was
supposed to have been destroyed by order of M. Desnoyers. See p. 204.</p></note> and was bought by
King Francis.</p>

<p>XLVIII. Now to return, Michael Angelo having been
called to Rome by Pope Clement, thereupon began the
affair with the Duke of Urbino's agents concerning the
Tomb of Julius. Clement, who wished to employ him in
Florence, tried by every means to free him, and gave him
for his attorney one Messer Tommaso, of Prato, who afterwards
became Datario. But Michael Angelo, who knew
and feared the ill-will of Duke Alessandro towards him,
and at the same time loved and revered the bones of Pope
Julius, and all the illustrious House della Rovere, did all
he could to remain in Rome and work at the Tomb; the
more so because he was accused by every one of having
received from Pope Julius for that purpose fully sixteen
thousand scudi, and of having enjoyed it without doing
what he had undertaken. As he held his honour dear he
could not bear the disgrace, and desired that the affair
should be cleared up, not refusing, although he was old,
<pb n="63" /><anchor id="Pg63" />the heavy task he had begun. It came to this pass: the
adversaries were unable to prove payments that came
within a long way of the sum they had at first stated; on
the contrary, more than two-thirds were wanting of the
entire sum agreed upon by the two Cardinals. Clement
thought this a fine opportunity to get rid of the business,
and to leave Michael Angelo free to serve him. He called
him and said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Come, tell me, you wish to complete this
tomb; but you want to know who is to pay for the rest of
it.</hi>" Michael Angelo, who knew the Pope's mind, and that
he wished to make use of him himself, replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">And what
if some one were found who would pay me?</hi>" Pope Clement
said to him: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">You are quite mad if you imagine that any
one is likely to come forward to offer you a penny.</hi>" So
when Messer Tommaso, his attorney, appeared in court
making his proposition to the agents of the Duke, they
began to look one another in the face, and determined
together that some sort of tomb should be made for the
money that had already been advanced. Michael Angelo,
thinking well of it, consented willingly, moved chiefly by
the influence of the Cardinal of Montevecchio, a follower
of Julius II. and uncle to Julius III., now, thanks be to
God, our Pontiff. The agreement was: That Michael
Angelo should make a tomb with one <hi rend="font-style: italic">façade</hi> only, and
that he should use the marbles already carved for the
quadrangular tomb, arranging them as best he could; and
that he should supply six statues from his own hand. It
was conceded to Pope Clement that Michael Angelo should
serve him in Florence, or wheresoever he pleased, four
months in the year, his Holiness requiring this for the
work in Florence. Such was the contract agreed upon
between his Excellency the Duke and Michael Angelo.</p>

<p><pb n="64" /><anchor id="Pg64" />XLIX. But now it must be understood that these
accounts being settled Michael Angelo, to appear more
indebted to the Duke of Urbino and to give Pope Clement
less hope of sending him to Florence (where he did not by
any means wish to go), secretly agreed with the counsel
and agent of his Excellency that it should be said that he
had received some thousand scudi more on this account than
he really had. This was done not only by word of mouth,
but without his knowledge and consent it was inserted in
the written contract, not when it was sealed but when it
was written out, at which he was much disturbed. Nevertheless,
the counsel persuaded him that it would not
prejudice his case, for it did not matter whether the contract
specified twenty thousand or one thousand scudi,
since they were agreed that the scheme of the Tomb should
now be reduced in scale according to the amount of money
actually received, adding that nobody but themselves
would question the proceeding, and his interests were
secured by the understanding that was between them. So
with this Michael Angelo was pacified, because it appeared
to him that he might put his trust in them, as also
because he desired that this excuse should serve him with
the Pope for the purpose mentioned above. And thus the
matter ended for the time; but it was not nearly over
yet, because after he had served the four months at
Florence and returned to Rome, the Pope sought to use
him in another way, by making him paint the end wall of
the Sistine Chapel. And as one who had a good wit, he
thought of one thing after another until finally he resolved
to have the Day of the Last Judgment painted, considering
that the variety and grandeur of the subject would
give a wide field for this man to prove the power that
<pb n="65" /><anchor id="Pg65" />was in him. Michael Angelo, knowing the obligation
he was under to the Duke of Urbino, endeavoured to
free himself from this new charge, but as he could not
he put it off as much as possible; whilst pretending to
busy himself with the cartoon, as he partly did, he was
secretly working at the statues for the Tomb.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="66" /><anchor id="Pg66" /><head>CHAPTER IX</head>

<head type="sub">THE LAST ACT OF THE TRAGEDY OF THE TOMB,
AND THE DAY OF JUDGMENT</head>

<p>L. Meanwhile Pope Clement died and Paul III. was
elected. He sent for Michael Angelo and requested him
to serve him. Michael Angelo, fearing that he would be
hindered in the work of the Tomb, replied that he could
not, for he was engaged by contract to the Duke of
Urbino until he had finished the work that he had in
hand. The Pope was much annoyed, and said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">It is
some thirty years that I have had this wish, shall I not
satisfy it now I am Pope? Where is the contract that I
may tear it up?</hi>" Michael Angelo, seeing it had come to
this, was for leaving Rome and betaking himself to the
country about Genoa, to an abbey of the Bishops of
Aleria, to a follower of Julius, very much his friend,
and there bring his work to an end. This place was conveniently
near Carrara and good for carrying the marbles
by sea. He thought also of going to Urbino, where he
had formerly designed to live, as a quiet resting-place, and
where, for the sake of Julius, he would be welcomed cordially.
For this reason he had sent one of his men some
months before to buy a house and some land; but fearing
the greatness of the Pontiff, with good reason, he did not
go, and hoped with soft words to satisfy the Pope.</p>

<p><pb n="67" /><anchor id="Pg67" />LI. But the Pope continued firm in his proposals.
One day he came to visit Michael Angelo in his house,
bringing with him eight or ten Cardinals. He wished to
see the cartoon for the wall of the Sistine Chapel made for
Clement, and the statues already carved for the Tomb, and
minutely examined everything. Then the Most Reverend
Cardinal of Mantua, who was present, seeing the Moses,
of which we have already written, and of which we will
write more copiously by-and-bye, said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">This statue alone
is enough to do honour to the Tomb of Pope Julius.</hi>" When
Pope Paul had seen everything he again asked Michael
Angelo, in the presence of the Cardinals, including the
before-mentioned Most Reverend and Illustrious of Mantua,
to come and work for him, but finding Michael Angelo
obdurate, he said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">I will arrange that the Duke of
Urbino shall be satisfied with these statues by your hand,
and that the three remaining ones shall be given to others
to do.</hi>" He obtained a new contract from the agents,
confirmed by his Excellency the Duke, who did not wish
to displease the Pope. Although Michael Angelo might
have avoided paying for these three statues, this contract
freeing him from the obligation, nevertheless he wished to
bear the expense himself, and he deposited for these and
the remaining works of the Tomb one thousand five hundred
and eighty ducats. Thus the agents of the Duke
allowed it, and the Tragedy of the Tomb and the Tomb
itself had an end at last. To-day it may be seen in the
Church of San Pietro ad Vincula, not according to the
first design with four sides, but with one side, and that
one of the lesser, not detached all round and isolated,
but built up against a wall on account of the hindrances
mentioned above. It is yet true that, although it is
<pb n="68" /><anchor id="Pg68" />botched and patched up, it is the most worthy monument
to be found in Rome, or, perhaps, anywhere else;
if for nothing else, at least, for the three statues that are
by the hand of the master: among them that most
marvellous Moses, leader and captain of the Hebrews,
who is seated in an attitude of thought and wisdom, holding
under his right arm the tables of the law, and supporting
his chin with his left hand, like one tired and full of cares.
Between the fingers of that hand escape long waves of
his beard&mdash;a very beautiful thing to see. And his face is
full of life and thought, and capable of inspiring love and
terror, which, perhaps, was the truth. It has, according
to the usual descriptions, the two horns on his head a
little way from the top of the forehead. He is robed and
shod in the manner of the antique, with his arms bare.
A work most marvellous and full of art, and much more
so because all the form is apparent beneath the beautiful
garments with which it is covered. The dress does not
hide the shape and beauty of the body, as, in a word,
may be seen in all Michael Angelo's clothed figures,
whether in painting or sculpture. The statue is more
than twice the size of life. At the right hand of this
statue, under a niche, is one that represents Contemplative
Life&mdash;a woman, larger than life and of rare beauty, with
bent knee, not to the ground but on a plinth, with her
face and both her hands raised to heaven, so that she
seems to breathe love in every part. On the other side,
that is to say on the left of Moses, is Active Life, with a
mirror in her right hand, into which she gazes attentively,
meaning by this that our actions should be
governed by forethought; and in her left hand a garland
of flowers. In this Michael Angelo followed Dante, of
<pb n="69" /><anchor id="Pg69" />whom he was always a great student, for in his Purgatorio
he feigns to have the Countess Matilda, whom he
takes to represent Active Life, in a field full of flowers.
The Tomb is altogether beautiful, especially the binding of
the several parts together by the great cornice, to which
no one could take exception.</p>

<p>LII. Now that is enough for this work; indeed, I fear it
is only too much, and that instead of giving pleasure it
will have been tedious to the reader. Nevertheless, it
appeared to me necessary, in order to remove those unfortunate
and false scandals, rooted in men's minds, that
Michael Angelo had received sixteen thousand scudi, and
then would not carry out the work he had undertaken.
Neither the one nor the other was true, because he had from
Julius for the Tomb only one thousand ducats, spent in
those months of quarrying marble at Carrara. How then
could Michael Angelo have received money for it from him,
since he changed his purpose and would hear no more of
the Tomb? As to the money Michael Angelo received,
after the death of Pope Julius, from the two cardinals,
his executors, Michael Angelo possesses a written public
acknowledgment&mdash;by the hand of a notary, from Bernardo
Bini, Florentine citizen, who was trustee, and payed out
the money&mdash;that the payments amounted to about three
thousand ducats. Never was man more anxious about his
work than Michael Angelo in this, as much because he
knew how great fame it would bring him as for the loving
memory in which he always held the blessed spirit of Pope
Julius, for that reason he has always honoured and loved the
House della Rovere, and especially the Dukes of Urbino,
for that reason he has contended with two Popes, as has
<pb n="70" /><anchor id="Pg70" />been said, who wished to withdraw him from the undertaking.
But what grieved Michael Angelo the most, is
that instead of thanks all he got was odium and disgrace.</p>

<p>LIII. But returning to Pope Paul. I must tell you
that after the last agreement made between his Excellency
the Duke and Michael Angelo, the Pope took Michael
Angelo into his service, and desired him to carry out what
he had begun in the time of Clement, to paint the end
wall of the Sistine Chapel, which he had already covered
with rough-cast and screened off with boards from floor to
ceiling. As this work was instigated by Pope Clement,
and begun in his time, it does not bear the arms of Paul,
although he desired it; but Pope Paul so loved and
reverenced Michael Angelo that however much he desired
it he would never have vexed him. In this work Michael
Angelo expressed all that the human figure is capable of
in the art of painting, not leaving out any pose or action
whatsoever. The composition is careful and well thought
out, but lengthy to describe; perhaps it is unnecessary, as
so many engravings and such a variety of drawings of it
have been dispersed everywhere. Nevertheless, for those
who have not seen the real thing, and into whose hands
the engravings have not come, let us say, briefly, that
the whole is divided into parts, right and left, upper and
lower, and central. In the central part, near to the earth,
are seven angels, described by Saint John in the Apocalypse,
with trumpets to their lips, calling the dead to
judgment from the four corners of the earth. With them
are two others having an open book in their hands, in
which every one reads and recognises his past life, having
almost to judge himself. At the sound of these trumpets
<pb n="71" /><anchor id="Pg71" />the graves open and the human race issues from the earth,
all with varied and marvellous gestures; while in some,
according to the prophecy of Ezekiel, the bones only have
come together, in some they are half clothed with flesh,
and in others entirely covered; some naked, some clothed
in the shrouds and grave-clothes in which they were wrapped
when buried, and of which they seek to divest themselves.
Among these are some who are not yet fully risen, and
looking up to heaven in doubt as to whither Divine
justice shall call them. It is a delightful thing to see
them with labour and pains issue forth from the earth, and,
with arms out-stretched to heaven, take flight; those who
are already risen lifted up into the air, some higher and
some lower, with different gestures and characters. Above
the angels of the trumpets is the Son of God in majesty,
in the form of a man, with arm and strong right hand
uplifted. He wrathfully curses the wicked, and drives
them from before his face into eternal fire. With His left
hand stretched out to those on the right, He seems to
draw the good gently to Himself. The angels are seen
between heaven and earth as executors of the Divine commands.
On the right they rush to aid the elect, whose
flight is impeded by malignant spirits; and on the left to
dash back to earth the damned, who in their audacity
attempt to scale the heavens. Evil spirits drag down
these wicked ones into the abyss, the proud by the hair of
the head, and so also every sinner by the member through
which he sinned. Beneath them is seen Charon with his
black boat, just as Dante described him in the "Inferno,"
on muddy Acheron, raising his oar to strike some laggard
soul. As the bark touches the bank, pushed on by Divine
justice, all these souls strive to fling themselves ashore, so
<pb n="72" /><anchor id="Pg72" />that fear, as the poet says, is changed into longing. Afterwards
they receive from Minos their sentence, to be dragged
by demons to the bottomless pit, where are marvellous
contortions, grievous and desperate as the place demands.
In the middle of the composition, on the clouds of heaven,
the Blessed already arisen form a crown and circle around
the Son of God. Apart, and beside the Son, appears His
Mother, timorous and seeming hardly secure herself from
the wrath and mystery of God; she draws as near as
possible to the Son. Next to her the Baptist, the Twelve
Apostles, and all the saints of God, each one showing to
the tremendous Judge the symbol of the martyrdom by
which he glorified God: St. Andrew the cross, St. Bartholomew
his skin, St. Lawrence the gridiron, St. Sebastian
the arrows, San Biagio the combs of iron, St. Catherine
the wheel, and others other things whereby they are known.
Above these on the right and left, on the upper part of
the wall, are groups of angels, with actions gracious and
rare, raising in heaven the Cross of the Son of God, the
Sponge, the Crown of Thorns, the Nails, and the Column
of the Flagellation, to reproach the wicked with the
blessings of God of which they have been so heedless, and
for which they have been so ungrateful, and to comfort
and give confidence to the good. There are infinite details
which I pass over in silence. It is enough that, besides the
divine composition, all that the human figure is capable of
in the art of painting is here to be seen.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="73" /><anchor id="Pg73" /><head>CHAPTER X</head>

<head type="sub">THE CHAPEL OF POPE PAUL AND THE PIETÀ OF
SANTA MARIA DEL FIORE</head>

<p>LIV. Finally, Pope Paul having built a chapel on the
same floor as the before-mentioned Sistine, he desired to
decorate it in his own memory, and he made Michael
Angelo paint the frescoes on the side walls. In one is
represented the crucifixion of St. Peter; in the other the
story of St. Paul&mdash;how he was converted by the apparition
of Jesus Christ&mdash;both stupendous in general composition
as in the individual figures. And this is the last work of
painting by Michael Angelo that has been seen to this
day; he finished it in his seventy-fifth year. At present
he has in hand a group in marble, which he works at for
his pleasure, as one who full of ideas and powers must
produce something every day. It is a group of four figures,
larger than life&mdash;a Deposition. The dead Christ is held
up by His Mother; she supports the body on her bosom
with her arms and with her knees, a wonderfully beautiful
gesture. She is aided by Nicodemus above, who is erect
and stands firmly&mdash;he holds her under the arms and
sustains her with manly strength&mdash;and on the left by one
of the Marys, who, although exhibiting the deepest grief,
does not omit to do those offices that the Mother, by the
extremity of her sorrow, is unable to perform. The Christ
<pb n="74" /><anchor id="Pg74" />is dead, all His limbs fall relaxed, but withall in a very
different manner from the Christ Michael Angelo made for
the Marchioness of Pescara or the Christ in the Madonna
della Febbre. It is impossible to speak of its beauty and
its sorrow, of the grieving and sad faces of them all,
especially of the afflicted Mother. Let it suffice; I tell you
it is a rare thing, and one of the most laborious works that
he has yet done, principally because all the figures are
distinct from each other, the folds of the draperies of one
figure not confused with those of the others.</p>

<p>LV. Michael Angelo has done infinitely more things
of which I have not spoken, such as the Christ that is in
the Church of the Minerva, a St. Matthew in Florence;
when he began it he designed to carve all the twelve
Apostles to be placed near twelve pilasters in the Duomo.
His cartoons for several works of paintings, and of designs
for buildings, both public and private, are infinite in
number; and, lastly, for a bridge to span the Grand Canal
of Venice, of a new shape and style of which the like was
never seen; and many other things never to be seen. It
would be long to describe them, so I make an end. He
intends to give the Deposition from the Cross to some
church, and to be buried at the foot of the altar where it
is placed. The Lord God in His goodness long preserve
him to us, for without doubt the same day will end his
life and his labours, as is written of Socrates. His active
and vigorous old age gives me firm hope that he has many
years to live, as also the long life of his father, who lived to
ninety-two years without knowing what it was to have a
fever, and then dying more for lack of resolution than for
any illness; so that when he was dead, as Michael Angelo
<pb n="75" /><anchor id="Pg75" />relates, his face retained the same colour that he had when
living, appearing rather asleep than dead.</p>

<p>LVI. From a child Michael Angelo was a hard worker,
and to the gifts of nature added study, not using the
labours and industry of others, but, desiring to learn from
nature herself, he set her up before him as the true
example. There is no animal whose anatomy he did not
desire to study, much more than that of man; so that
those who have spent all their lives in that science, and
who make a profession of it, hardly know so much of it as
he. I speak of such knowledge as is necessary to the arts
of painting and sculpture, not of other minutiæ that
anatomists observe. And thus it is that his figures show
so much art and learning, so that they are inimitable by
any painter whatever. I have always been of this opinion,
that the forces and efforts of nature have a prescribed end,
fixed and ordained by God, which it is impossible for
ordinary powers to pass; and this is so not only in painting
and sculpture, but universally in all arts and sciences; and
that she gives power to one person that he may be a rule
and example in a particular art, giving him the first place;
so that afterwards, if any one desires to bring forth a
great work in that art, worthy to be read or seen, he
must work in the same way as the first great example, or,
at least, similarly, and go by his road; for if he does not
his work will be much inferior, the worse the more he
diverges from the direct path. After Plato and Aristotle,
how many philosophers have we seen who, not following
them, have been worth anything? How many orators
after Demosthenes and Cicero? How many mathematicians
after Euclid and Archimedes? How many doctors
<pb n="76" /><anchor id="Pg76" />after Hypocrates and Galen? Or poets after Homer and
Virgil? And if there has been any one who has been
able by his own abilities to arrive at the first place in any
one of these sciences and finds it already occupied, he either
acknowledges the first one to have arrived at perfection,
and gives up the attempt, or if he has sense he follows
him as the ideal of the perfect. This has been exemplified
in our own day in Bembo, in Sanazzaro, in Caro, in
Guidoccione, in the Marchioness of Pescara, and in other
writers and lovers of the Tuscan rhyme, who, although
gifted with the highest and most singular genius, none
the less, not being able of themselves to do better than
nature exemplifies in Petrarca, they set themselves to
follow him, but so happily that they are judged worthy to
be read and counted with the best.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="77" /><anchor id="Pg77" /><head>CHAPTER XI</head>

<head type="sub">CONCLUSION OF THE LIFE BY CONDIVI</head>

<p>LVII. Now to consider my remarks. I say, that it
seems to me, that nature has endowed Michael Angelo so
largely with all her riches in these arts of painting and
sculpture, that I am not to be reproached for saying
that his figures are almost inimitable. Nor does it
appear that I have allowed myself to be too much carried
away, for until now he alone has worthily taken up
both chisel and brush. Of the painting of the ancients
there is no memorial, and to whom does he yield in their
sculpture (of which, indeed, much remains)? In the judgment
of men learned in the art, to no one, unless we stoop
to the opinion of the vulgar, who admire the antique for
the sole reason that they envy the genius and industry of
their own times. All the same, I have not yet heard any one
say the contrary; this man is so far above envy. Raffael
da Urbino, although he desired to compete with Michael
Angelo, was often constrained to say that he thanked God
he was born in his time as he acquired from him a style
very different from that which he learnt from his father,
who was a painter, and from his master Perugino. But
what greater and clearer sign can we ever have of the
excellence of this man than the contention of the Princes
of the world for him? From the four Pontiffs, Julius,
<pb n="78" /><anchor id="Pg78" />Leo, Clement, and Paul, to the Grand Turk, father of
him who to-day holds the Empire. As I have said above,
the Sultan sent certain monks of the Order of Saint
Francis with letters begging Michael Angelo to come and
stay with him; arranging by letters of credit for the bank
of the Gondi, in Florence, to advance the amount of money
necessary for his journey, and also that from Cossa, near
Ragusi, he should be accompanied to Constantinople
most honourably by one of his grandees. Francesco<note place="foot"><p>Francis I.</p></note>
Valesio, King of France, tried every means to get him,
crediting him with three thousand scudi for his journey
whenever he should go. Il Bruciolo was sent to Rome by
the Signoria of Venice to invite him to come and dwell in
that city, and to offer him a provision of six hundred scudi
a year, not binding him to anything, only that he should
honour the Republic with his presence; with the condition
also that if he did any work in her service he should be
paid for it as if he received no pension from them at all.
These are not ordinary doings that happen every day, but
new and out of the common use, and would only happen
to singular and most excellent worth, as was that of
Homer, for whom many cities contested, each one appropriating
him as her own.</p>

<p>LVIII. He is held of no less account, than by those
already named, by the present Pontiff, Julius III., a Prince
of supreme wisdom and a lover and patron of all the arts;
but particularly inclined to painting, sculpture, and architecture,
as may be clearly known by the works he has
done in the Palazzo and the Belvedere, and now has
ordered for his villa Giulia (a memorial and scheme worthy
<pb n="79" /><anchor id="Pg79" />of a noble and generous soul like his). It is filled with
so many statues, ancient and modern, so great variety of
beautiful stones, precious columns, plaster work, paintings,
and every other kind of ornament, of which I will write
another time, as a unique work, not yet in its perfection,
requires. He does not ask Michael Angelo to work for
him. Having respect for his age, he understands well and
appreciates his greatness; but wishes not to overburden
him. This regard, in my judgment, brings Michael
Angelo more honour than all his employment under the
other Popes. It is, however, true, that in the paintings and
<corr sic="archictecture" resp="Hutchinson">architecture</corr> that his Holiness is continually having done,
he almost always seeks Michael Angelo's advice and judgment,
frequently sending the artists to seek him at his
house. It grieves me, and it grieves also his Holiness,
that by reason of a certain natural timidity, or let us say
respect and reverence, which some call pride, Michael
Angelo does not profit by the goodwill, kindness, and
liberality of so great a Pontiff and so much his friend.
As I first heard from the most Reverend Monsignor di
Forlì, his chamberlain, the Pope has often said that (if it
were possible) he would willingly take from his own
years and his own blood to add to the life of Michael
Angelo, that the world might not so soon be deprived of
such a man. I also, having access to his Holiness, heard it
from his lips with my own ears, and more also, that if
he survives him, as in the natural course of life is probable,
he will have Michael Angelo's body embalmed and
keep it near him, so that it should be as lasting as his
works. He said this at the beginning of his Pontificate
to Michael Angelo himself in the presence of many. I
do not know what could be more honourable to Michael
<pb n="80" /><anchor id="Pg80" />Angelo than these words, or a greater proof of the esteem
in which the Pope holds him.</p>

<p>LIX. Again the Pope showed his esteem plainly when
Pope Paul died and he was created Pontiff, in a consistory,
all the Cardinals then in Rome being present. He defended
Michael Angelo and protected him from the overseers of
the fabric of St. Peter's, who, for no fault of his, as they
said, but of his servants, wished to deprive him of, or at
least to restrain, that authority given him by Pope Paul by
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">moto proprio</hi>, of which more will be said below. He
defended him, and not only confirmed the <hi rend="font-style: italic">moto proprio</hi>
but honoured him by many kind words, not lending his
ears to the quarrels of the overseers or anybody else.
Michael Angelo knows (as many times he has told me) the
love and kindness of his Holiness towards him, and how
he respects him; and because he cannot requite the Pope
with his services, and show his love, he will regret all the
rest of his life that he seems useless and appears ungrateful
to his Holiness. One thing comforts him somewhat (as
he is accustomed to say); knowing the wisdom of his
Holiness he hopes to be excused, and being unable to give
more, that his good will may be accepted. Nor does he
refuse, as far as he has the power, and for all he may be
worth, to spend his life in his service; this I have from
his own mouth. Nevertheless, at the request of his
Holiness, Michael Angelo designed the façade of a palace
that the Pope had a mind to build in Rome, a thing new
and original to those who have seen it&mdash;not bound to any
laws, ancient or modern, as in many other works of his in
Florence and in Rome&mdash;proving that architecture has
not been so arbitrarily handled in the past that there
<pb n="81" /><anchor id="Pg81" />is not room for fresh invention no less delightful and
beautiful.</p>

<p>LX. Now to return to anatomy. He gave up dissection
because it turned his stomach so that he could neither eat
nor drink with benefit. It is very true that he did not
give up until he was so learned and rich in such knowledge
that he often had in his mind the wish to write, for the
sake of sculptors and painters, a treatise on the movements
of the human body, its aspect, and concerning the bones,
with an ingenious theory of his own, devised after long
practice. He would have done it had he not mistrusted his
powers, lest they should not suffice to treat with dignity
and grace of such a subject, like one practised in the
sciences and in rhetoric. I know well that when he reads
Alberto Duro he finds him very weak, seeing in his own
mind how much more beautiful and useful his own conception
would be. To tell the truth, Alberto only treats
of the proportions and diversities of the body, for which
one cannot make fixed rules, making figures as regular as
posts; and what matters more, says nothing of human
movements and gestures. And because Michael Angelo
has now reached a ripe old age, he thinks of putting his
ideas in writing and giving them to the world. With great
devotion he has explained everything minutely to me; he
also conferred with Messer Realdo Colombo, an anatomist
and most excellent surgeon, a great friend of Michael
Angelo's and mine. He sent to Michael Angelo for study
the body of a Moor, a very fine young man, and very suitable
to the purpose; he was sent to Santa Agata, where I then
lived and still live, as it is a quiet place. On this corpse
Michael Angelo showed me many rare and recondite facts,
<pb n="82" /><anchor id="Pg82" />perhaps never before understood, all of which I noted
down, and hope one day, with the help of some learned
man, to publish for the advantage and use of painters and
sculptors; but enough of this.</p>

<p>LXI. He devoted himself to perspective and to architecture,
his works show with what profit. Michael Angelo
did not content himself with knowing only the main
features of architecture, but wished also to know about
everything that could be useful in any way in that profession,
such as ties, platforms, scaffolding, and such like,
he knew as much of these things as those who profess
nothing else, which was exemplified in the time of Julius II.
in this wise. When Michael Angelo had to paint the
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel the Pope ordered Bramante
to erect the scaffolding. For all the architect he was he did
not know how to do it, but pierced the vault in many
places, letting down certain ropes through these holes to
sling the platform. When Michael Angelo saw it he smiled,
and asked Bramante what was to be done when he came to
those holes? Bramante had no defence to make, only
replied that it could not be done any other way. The
matter came before the Pope, and Bramante replied again
to the same effect. The Pope turned to Michael Angelo
and said: <hi rend="font-style: italic">"As it is not satisfactory go and do it yourself."</hi>
Michael Angelo took down the platform, and took away
so much rope from it, that having given it to a poor man
that assisted him, it enabled him to dower and marry two
daughters. Michael Angelo erected his scaffold without
ropes, so well devised and arranged that the more weight
it had to bear the firmer it became. This opened Bramante's
eyes, and gave him a lesson in the building of a platform,
<pb n="83" /><anchor id="Pg83" />which was very useful to him in the works of St. Peter's.
For all that, Michael Angelo, although he had no equal in
all these things, would not make a profession of architecture.
On the contrary, when at last Antonio da San
Gallo, the architect of St. Peter's, died, and Pope Paul
wished to put Michael Angelo in his place, he refused the
post, saying that architecture was not his art. He refused
it so earnestly that the Pope had to command him to take
it, and issue an ample <hi rend="font-style: italic">moto proprio</hi>, which was afterwards
confirmed by Pope Julius III., now, as I have said, by the
grace of God, our Pontiff. For these, his services, Michael
Angelo received no payment; so he wished it to be stated
in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">moto proprio</hi>. One day, when Pope Paul sent him
a hundred scudi of gold by Messer Pier Giovanni, then
Gentleman of the Wardrobe to his Holiness, now Bishop of
Forlì, as his month's salary on account of the building,
Michael Angelo would not accept it, saying it was not in
the agreement they had between them, and he sent them
back. The Pope was very angry, as I have been told by
Messer Alessandro Ruffini, a gentleman of Rome, then
Groom to the Chambers and Carver before his Holiness;
but this did not move Michael Angelo from his resolution.
When he had accepted this charge he made a new model,
both because certain parts of the old one did not please
him in many respects, and, besides, if it was followed one
would sooner expect to see the end of the world than
St. Peter's finished. This model, praised and approved by
the Pope, is now being followed to the great satisfaction
of those who have judgment, although there be certain
persons who do not approve of it.</p>

<p>LXII. Michael Angelo gave himself, then, whilst still
<pb n="84" /><anchor id="Pg84" />young, not only to sculpture and painting, but to all the
kindred arts, with such devotion that for a time he almost
withdrew from the fellowship of men, only consorting
with a few. So that by some he was held to be proud,
and by others odd and eccentric, though he had none of
these vices; but (like many excellent men) a love of knowledge
and continued exercise in the learned arts made
him solitary, and he was so satisfied and took such a
delight in them that company not only did not please
him but even annoyed him, as interrupting his meditations
he was never less solitary than when alone (as the
great Scipio used to say of himself).</p>

<p>LXIII. Nevertheless, he willingly kept the friendship
of those from whose wise and learned conversation he
could gather any fruit and in whom shone some ray of
excellence, such as the Most Reverend and Illustrious
Monsignor Polo,<note place="foot"><p>Afterwards Cardinal Pole, Papal Legate in the time of King
Henry VIII. and Queen Mary I., born at Stourton Castle, Staffordshire,
1500; died November 18, 1558.</p></note> for his rare learning and singular goodness;
and similarly my Most Reverend patron the Cardinal
Crispo, finding in him besides his many good
qualities a rare and excellent judgment. He had also a
great affection for the Most Reverend Cardinal Santa Croce,
a man of great weight and most prudent, of whom I have
heard him speak more than once with the highest esteem;
and the Most Reverend Maffei, whose goodness and learning
he always speaks of; and generally loves and honours all the
House of the Farnese, for the lively memory he cherishes
of Pope Paul, recalling him with the utmost reverence,
speaking of him constantly as a good and holy old man.
<pb n="85" /><anchor id="Pg85" />And so, too, the Most Reverend Patriarch of Jerusalem,
formerly Bishop of Cesena, with whom he has often conversed
familiarly, as one whose open and liberal nature
much pleased him. He had also a close friendship with
my Most Reverend patron, the Cardinal Ridolfi, of happy
memory, the refuge of all men of talent. There are
others whom I leave out, so as not to be tedious, as Monsignor
Claudio Toleméi, Messer Lorenzo Ridolfi, Messer
Donato Giannotti, Messer Lionardo Malaspini, Il Lottino,
Messer Tomaso de' Cavalieri, and other honourable gentlemen,
of whom I will not write at length. Finally, he has
a great affection for Annibal Caro. He has told me that
he is sorry not to have known him before, as he is so much
to his taste. More particularly he loved greatly the
Marchioness of Pescara, of whose divine spirit he was
enamoured, being in return loved tenderly by her. He
still possesses many letters of hers, full of an honest and
most sweet love, such as issued from her heart. He has
written to her also many and many sonnets, full of wit
and sweet desire. She often returned to Rome from
Viterbo and other places, where she had gone for her
pastime and to spend the summer, for no other reason
than to see Michael Angelo; and he bore her so much
love that I remember to have heard him say: Nothing
grieved him so much as that when he went to see her
after she passed away from this life he did not kiss her on
the brow or face, as he did kiss her hand. Recalling this,
her death, he often remained dazed as one bereft of sense.
He made at the wish of his lady a naked Christ, when He
was taken down from the Cross, and His dead body
would have fallen at the feet of His most holy Mother, if
it were not supported by the arms of two angels; but
<pb n="86" /><anchor id="Pg86" />she, seated under the Cross with a tearful and sorrowful
face, raises to heaven both hands with her arms out-stretched,
with this cry, which one reads inscribed on the
stem of the cross:</p>

<p rend="display">NON VI SI PENSA QUANTO SANGUE COSTA!</p>

<p>The Cross is like that which was carried in procession by
the Bianchi at the time of the plague of 1348, and afterwards
placed in the Church of Santa Croce, at Florence.
He also made for love of her a drawing of a Jesu Christ
on the Cross, not as if dead, as is the common use, but
with a Divine gesture. Raising His face to the Father He
seems to say, "Eli, Eli." The body does not hang like
a corpse but as if still living, and contorted by the bitter
agony of His death.</p>

<p>LXIV. And as he greatly delighted in the conversation
of the learned, so he took pleasure in the study of
the writers of both prose and poetry. He had a special
admiration for Dante, delighting in the admirable genius
of that man, almost all of whose works he knew by heart;
he held Petrarca in no less esteem. He not only delighted
in reading, but occasionally in composing, too, as may be
seen by some sonnets that are to be found of his. Concerning
some of them, there have been published&mdash;"Lectures
and Criticisms by Varchi." But he wrote these sonnets
more for his pleasure than because he made a profession
of it, always belittling them himself, accusing himself of
ignorance in these matters.</p>

<p>LXV. Likewise, with deep study and attention, he read
the Holy Scriptures, both the Old and the New Testaments,
<pb n="87" /><anchor id="Pg87" />and searched them diligently, as also the writings
of Savonarola, for whom he always had a great affection,
keeping always in his mind the memory of his living voice.
He has also loved the beauty of the human body, as one
who best understands it; and in such wise that certain
carnal-minded men, who do not comprehend the love of
beauty, have taken occasion to think and speak evil of
him, as if Alcibiades, a youth of perfect beauty, had not
been purely loved by Socrates, from whose side he arose
as from the side of his father. I have often heard Michael
Angelo reason and discourse of Love, and learned afterwards
from those who were present that he did not speak
otherwise of Love than is to be found written in the works
of Plato. For myself I do not know what Plato says of
Love, but I know well that I, who have known Michael
Angelo so long and so intimately, have never heard issue
from his mouth any but the most honest of words, which
had the power to extinguish in youth every ill-regulated
and unbridled desire which might arise. By this we may
know that no evil thoughts were born in him. He loved
not only human beauty, but universally every beautiful
thing&mdash;a beautiful horse, a beautiful dog, a beautiful
country, a beautiful plant, a beautiful mountain, a beautiful
forest, and every place and thing beautiful and rare
after its kind, admiring them all with a marvellous love;
thus choosing the beauty in nature as the bees gather
honey from the flowers, using it afterwards in his works,
as all those have done who have ever made a noise in
painting. That old master who had to paint a Venus
was not content to see one virgin only, but studied many,
and taking from each her most beautiful and perfect
feature gave them to his Venus; and, in truth, who ever
<pb n="88" /><anchor id="Pg88" />expects to arrive at a true theory of art without this
method of study is greatly mistaken.</p>

<p>LXVI. All through his life Michael Angelo has been
very abstemious, taking food more from necessity than
from pleasure, especially when at work, at which time, for
the most part, he has been content with a piece of bread,
which he munched whilst he laboured. But latterly he
has lived more regularly, his advanced age requiring it.
I have often heard him say: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ascanio, rich man as I have
made myself, I have always lived as a poor one.</hi>" And as
he took little food so he took little sleep, which, as he
says, rarely did him any good, for sleeping almost always
made his head ache, and too much sleep made his stomach
bad. When he was more robust he often slept in his
clothes and with his buskins on; this he made a habit of
for fear of the cramp, from which he continually suffered,
besides other reasons; and he has sometimes been so long
without taking them off that when he did so the skin
came off with them like the slough of a snake. He was
never miserly with his money, nor did he hoard it, contented
with enough to live honestly. Works from his
hand were sought for more and more by the gentry
and rich people with large promises, but he has rarely
satisfied them; and when he has done so, it has been
from friendship and goodwill rather than for hope of
reward.</p>

<p>LXVII. He has given away many of his things, which,
if he had wished to sell them, would have brought him in
endless money; as, for example, were there no others,
the two statues that he gave to Roberto Strozzi, his
<pb n="89" /><anchor id="Pg89" />great friend.<note place="foot"><p>The Slaves, now in the Louvre, Paris.</p></note> He has not only been liberal with his
works, but with his purse also he has often helped the
talented and studious poor in their need, whether men of
letters or painters; of this I am able to testify, having
benefited by it myself. He was never jealous of the
labours of others even in his own art, more by his goodness
of nature than any opinion he had of himself. On
the contrary, he has praised all universally, even Raphael
of Urbino, between whom and himself there was formally
some rivalry in painting, as I have written; only I have
heard him say that Raphael had not his art by nature, but
acquired it by long study. Nor is it true what many say
of him, that he would not teach; on the contrary, he has
done so willingly, as I know myself, for to me he has made
known all the secrets of his art; but unfortunately he has
met either with pupils little apt, or even if apt without
perseverance, so after working under his discipline a few
months they thought themselves masters. Now, although
he would readily do kindly acts, he was unwilling to have
them known, wishing more to do well than to appear to
do so. It must also be known that he has always desired
to cultivate the arts in persons of nobility, as was the
manner of the ancients, and not in plebeians.</p>

<p>LXVIII. Michael Angelo had a most retentive memory,
so that although he has painted so many thousand figures,
as may be seen, he has never made one like to another,
or in the same pose; indeed, I have heard him say that if
ever he draws a line which he remembers to have drawn
before, he rubs it out if it is to come before the public.
He has also a most powerful imagination, from whence it
<pb n="90" /><anchor id="Pg90" />comes, firstly, that he is little contented with his work,
his hand not appearing to carry out the ideas he has conceived
in his mind. And, secondly, from the same cause
(as often happens to those who lead a peaceful and contemplative
life), he has always been somewhat timid;
saving only when a just indignation against some wrong or
lapse of duty to himself or to others moves him, then he
plucks up more spirit than those who are held to be
courageous; otherwise he is of a most patient disposition.
Of his modesty it is not possible to say as much as he
deserves; and so also of his manners, and his ways, they
are seasoned with pleasantries and sharp sayings: for
instance, his conversation at Bologna with a certain gentleman,
who, seeing the mere largeness and mass of the bronze
statue Michael Angelo had made, marvelled and said:
"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Which do you suppose to be the larger, this statue or a
pair of oxen?</hi>" To whom Michael Angelo replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">It is
according to the oxen you mean; if it be these of Bologna
doubtless they are much larger; if ours of Florence they are
much smaller.</hi>"<note place="foot"><p>The ox, in Italian banter, appears to have taken the position of
the ass with us in England, as a dull, heavy beast, a fool. Michael
Angelo's answer was, as it were: "It is according to the asses you
mean; if it be these asses of Bolognese doubtless they are much
bigger; if ours of Florence they are much smaller. You are bigger
asses in Bologna than we are in Florence."</p></note> So also when Il Francia, who was at that
time thought to be an Apelles in Bologna, came to see
that same statue and said: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">This is a beautiful bronze</hi>,"
it seemed to Michael Angelo that he was praising the
metal and not the form, so he laughingly replied: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">If
this be beautiful bronze, I must thank Pope Julius for it,
who gave it to me, as you have to thank the apothecaries
who provide your colours</hi>." And another day, seeing the
<pb n="91" /><anchor id="Pg91" />child of Francia, who was a very beautiful boy: "<hi rend="font-style: italic">My son,</hi>"
said he, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">your father makes better living pictures than
painted ones.</hi>"</p>

<p>LXIX. Michael Angelo is of a good complexion; his
figure rather sinuous and bony than fleshy and fat;
healthy above all by nature, as well as by the use of
exercise and his continence of life and moderation in taking
food; nevertheless, as a child he was feeble and sickly, and
as a man he had two illnesses. He has suffered much for
several years in the passing of urine, which trouble would
have turned into a stone if he had not been relieved by the
care and diligence of the before-mentioned Messer Realdo.
Michael Angelo has always had a good colour in his face;
he is of middle height; he is broad shouldered, with the
rest of the body in proportion, rather slight than not.
The shape of his skull in front is round; the height above
the ear is a sixth part of the circumference round the
middle of the head, so that the temples project somewhat
beyond the ears, and the ears beyond the cheek-bones, and
the cheek-bones beyond the rest of the face; the skull
in proportion to the face must be called large. The front
view of the forehead is square, the nose a little flattened,
not naturally, but because when he was a boy, one Torrigiano,
a brutal and proud fellow, with a blow almost broke
the cartilage, so that Michael Angelo was carried home as
one dead; for this Torrigiano was banished from Florence,
and he came to a bad end.<note place="foot"><p>Piero Torrigiano gave his version of the affair to Benvenuto Cellini
long afterwards: "This Buonarroti and I used, when we were boys, to
go into the Church of the Carmine to learn drawing from the Chapel of
Masaccio. It was Buonarroti's habit to banter all who were drawing
there, and one day, when he was annoying me, I got more angry than
usual, and, clenching my fist, I gave him such a blow on the nose that
I felt bone and cartilage go down like biscuit beneath my knuckles;
and this mark of mine he will carry with him to his grave." Cellini
adds&mdash;"These words begat in me such hatred of the man since I was
always gazing at the masterpieces of the divine Michael Angelo, that,
although I felt a wish to go with him to England, I now could never
bear the sight of him."</p>

<p>Torrigiano worked for Henry VIII. of England in Henry VII.
chapel, Westminster, and at Hampton Court. Afterwards he went to
Spain and came to a bad end there, as Condivi says. He died in the
prisons of the Inquisition, he had been condemned for destroying a
figure of the Madonna of his own carving; his patron paid him
insufficiently, so he went to the house, hammer in hand, and destroyed
the statue, with this unfortunate result. He starved himself to death in
prison as a worse fate awaited him. See Vasari.</p></note> Michael Angelo's nose, such
<pb n="92" /><anchor id="Pg92" />as it is, is in proportion to the forehead and the rest of
the face. His lips are mobile, the lower one somewhat the
thicker, so that seen in profile it sticks out a little. The
chin goes well with the above-mentioned parts. The forehead
in profile is almost in front of the nose, which is little
less than broken, except for a small lump in the middle.
The eyebrows have few hairs; the eyes are rather small
than otherwise, the colour is that of horn, but changing,
with sparkles of yellow and blue; the ears in proportion;
the hair black, and beard also, but, in this his seventy-ninth
year, plentifully sprinkled with grey; his beard is
forked, four or five fingers long and not very thick, as
may be seen in his portraits. Many other things remain
to be said, but I have left them out because of the hurry
in which I bring out these writings, hearing that others<note place="foot"><p>Can this refer to the Second Edition of "The Lives of the Painters,
Sculptors, and Architects," by the kindly Giorgio Vasari?</p></note>
wish to reap the reward of my labours, which I had confided
to their hands; so, if it should ever happen that
another should undertake this work again, I hereby offer
<pb n="93" /><anchor id="Pg93" />to tell him all I know, or most lovingly to give it to him
in writing. I hope before long to bring out some of
Michael Angelo's sonnets and madrigals, which I have for
a long time collected, both from himself and from others,
that the world may know the worth of his imaginations,
and how many beautiful conceits were born in his divine
spirit, and with this I close.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="95" /><anchor id="Pg95" /><head>PART II</head>

<head type="sub">THE WORKS OF MICHAEL ANGELO</head>

<quote rend="display"><p>"Non essendo homo in Italia apto ad expedire una opera
di costesta qualità, e necessario che lui solo, e non altro."</p>

<p rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Piero Soderini to the Marchese Alberigo Malaspina</hi>, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gaye</hi> ii. 107.</p></quote>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="97" /><anchor id="Pg97" /><head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">THE RAPE OF DEIANEIRA, OR THE BATTLE OF THE
CENTAURS, AND THE ANGEL OF THE SHRINE OF
SAINT DOMINIC</head>

<p>All accounts agree as to the precocity of the genius
of Michael Angelo, and Piero Soderini vouches for its
practical character in the words quoted above. It was
not until he had suffered from the procrastination and
uncertainty of the patronage of the Popes, that his work
took him so long to finish that sometimes it had to be
left incomplete. His early works were remarkable, not
only for their high finish but also for the expedition with
which they were carried out.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Condivi has given us the story of his early difficulties
and of his first picture,<note place="foot"><p>--<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Temptation of Saint Anthony</hi>, from the engraving by Martin
Schongauer.</p></note> probably in Michael Angelo's
own words; we may supplement this account by the
following extract from Vasari, who gathered his information
from the gossip of the workshops of Florence,
and from Ridolfo Ghirlandaio, the son of his first
master. "Michael Angelo grew in power and character
so rapidly that Domenico<note place="foot"><p>Ghirlandaio.</p></note> was astonished, seeing him
do things quite extraordinary in a youth, for it seemed
<pb n="98" /><anchor id="Pg98" />to him that he not only surpassed the other students, of
whom Domenico had a large number, but that he often
equalled the work done by him as master. Now, one of
the lads who studied under Domenico made a pen-drawing
of some women, draped, after Ghirlandaio. Michael
Angelo took up the paper, and with a thicker pen went
over the outline of one of the women with a new line,
correcting it, and making it perfect, so that it is wonderful
to see the difference between the two styles, and the
ability and judgment of a boy, so spirited and bold that
he had the courage to correct his master's handiwork.
This drawing is to-day in my possession, valued as a
relic. I had it from Granacci to put it in my book of
drawings with others given to me by Michael Angelo. In
the year 1550, being in Rome, I, Giorgio, showed it to
Michael Angelo, who recognised it and was pleased to see
it again, saying modestly that he knew more of art as a child
than now as an old man.<note place="foot"><p>There is a drawing in the Louvre of a faun's head, in pen and
ink, by Michael Angelo, over a red chalk drawing by an inferior hand.
It does not appear to be this drawing mentioned by Vasari, but a
caprice possibly of the same period, in which the master has undertaken
to draw a head with a pen, in which the projections and indentations of
the profile shall contradict the outline of the conventional red chalk
drawing below.</p></note> It happened that Domenico
was working in the great Chapel of Santa Maria Novella,
and one day when he was out Michael Angelo set himself
to draw from nature the scaffolding, the tables with all the
materials of the art, and some of the young men at work.
Presently Domenico returned, and saw Michael Angelo's
drawing. He was astonished, saying this boy knows more
than I do; and he was stupefied by this style and new
realism: a gift from heaven to a child of such tender years."</p>

<p><pb n="99" /><anchor id="Pg99" />The first art school of Michael Angelo was the beautiful
Church of Santa Maria Novella, called by him
affectionately "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Mia Sposa</hi>." Here, day by day, he beheld
the "Last Judgment" of Orcagna, the enthroned figures
in the Spanish Chapel, and the solemn blue Madonna,
now in the Capella Rucellai, with its little figures of
prophets on the frame that are already almost Michael
Angelesque. Here he transferred cartoons for Domenico
and painted draperies and ornaments; here he mixed
colours for fresco painting after the Florentine fashion;
and here possibly he first painted on a vault. No certain
trace of his handiwork can be identified upon the walls,
but there is a nude figure seated upon the steps resting
his chin upon his hand in the fresco of the Blessed Virgin
going to the Temple, that has a sinister expression and a
force of modelling that Domenico does not usually command.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Now Lorenzo de' Medici, the Magnificent, desired
to encourage the art of sculpture in Florence; he therefore
established a museum of antiquities in his garden
near San Marco, and made Bertoldo, the pupil of Donatello
and the foreman of his workshop, keeper of the
collection, with a special commission to aid and instruct
the young men who studied there. Lorenzo requested
Domenico Ghirlandaio to select from his pupils those he
considered the most promising, and send them to work in
the garden. Domenico sent Michael Angelo Buonarroti and
Francesco Granacci; possibly he was rather glad to get
these talented elements of insubordination out of his workshop.
Thus it was that Michael Angelo came under the
influence of a pupil and foreman of Donatello. Bertoldo
<pb n="100" /><anchor id="Pg100" />must be considered the instructor of Michael Angelo in his
beloved art of sculpture, and the most important influence
in shaping his genius. Very little is known of the
man upon whom this responsibility was placed, but he
appears to have been worthy of it. Vasari tells us
that Bertoldo "was old and could not work; that he
was none the less an able and highly reputed artist,
not only because he had most diligently chased and
polished the casts in bronze for the pupils of Donatello
his master, but also for the numerous casts in
bronze of battle-pieces and other little things, which
he had executed of his own; there was no one then
in Florence more masterly in such work." We have no
important work entirely by Bertoldo, but he must have
been a considerable artist or he would not have been
appointed to his important post by such a wise man as
Lorenzo the Magnificent. His share of the work for the
pulpits of San Lorenzo was probably much greater than
we are accustomed to think. Vasari's word <hi rend="font-style: italic">rinettato</hi>
had a much wider meaning to him than it has to us, the
chasing of a bronze was considered no small part of its
quality by the Florentines. Lorenzo Ghiberti's supposed
superiority over his competitors for the doors of San
Giovanni was more in his superb finish than in anything
else. The pulpits in San Lorenzo have something about
them that is between the art of Donatello and the art of
Michael Angelo; we may even owe a large part of the
composition in some of the stories to Bertoldo. Donatello
must have needed a man of judgment and ability to
carry out the numerous and important commissions
that issued from his workshops in his old age. That
Michael Angelo studied the pulpits of San Lorenzo is
<pb n="101" /><anchor id="Pg101" />proved by the numerous motives he took from them in
after life; the general aspect of the figures strangely suggests
the "terribilità" of his style, and the beginnings of
several of his motives can be traced to them, such as the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Centaurs</hi>, the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Pietà</hi>, and, in the Sistine ceiling, the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Adam</hi>;
the monochrome putti used as Caryatides; the single putto
placed at the springing of two arches; the athletes supporting
garlands, similar in proportion to the cherubs
supporting garlands used for the capitals of columns in
the pulpits; two figures for the spaces over the windows.
The man with the clean-shaven and bird-like face writing in
a book and dressed in trousers tied in at the ankles, like the
captive barbarians of Roman art, in one of the semi-circular
spaces round the windows, is very like a man standing behind
the Madonna who supports the dead Christ in the deposition
of the pulpit. Perhaps it is a portrait of old Bertoldo
himself. In this panel, too, are horsemen riding animals
similar to the ones Michael Angelo drew in his last fresco,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Conversion of Saint Paul</hi>. The composition for
the scourging of Christ, supplied by Michael Angelo to
Sebastiano del Piombo for his wall painting in San Pietro
in Montorio, follows the lines of the bas-relief of the same
subject on the pulpit. What is more likely than that
Bertoldo should have educated his great pupil by directing
him to the glories of the last work of his master, Donatello,
and that Michael Angelo should have studied them eagerly,
particularly if Bertoldo himself was partly responsible for
some of the panels, and may have been working upon them
at this time.<note place="foot"><p>Vasari tells us that one of these pulpits had not been placed in its
position in the church even when Michael Angelo's funeral service was
held there in 1564, so it is quite likely that it was still in the workshop
in 1489.</p></note></p>

<p><pb n="102" /><anchor id="Pg102" />The pulpits of San Lorenzo were the second school of
Michael Angelo, and Bertoldo was his master. No great
style ever sprang complete from the brain of its great
exponent, but grew and developed from master to pupil
until its supreme exponent blazed it before the world full
of the traditional fire of his predecessors, but distinctly
marked by his own dominant personality. The root of
the style of Michael Angelo may be seen in the works
of Donatello and in the pulpits of San Lorenzo. His
study of the antique,<note place="foot"><p>That is the Hellenic work of the degenerate Greeks in Italy: all
that was to be seen in his day.</p></note> modified by his love of grace, of
high finish, and his own powerful character, only had to
be added to complete the perfect flower of Florentine art,
Michael Angelo, the topmost bloom of the lily.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image02" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image02.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE RAPE OF DEIANEIRA AND THE BATTLE OF THE CENTAURS</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">CASA BUONARROTI, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari. Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #2</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>By good fortune, Michael Angelo attracted the notice
of Lorenzo the Magnificent, as Condivi has related;<note place="foot"><p>Page 10.</p></note>
and thus at the age of fifteen years he entered the most
cultured house in Italy and there acquired that distinction
of style that he kept all through his life, both in
his art and his manner. In these halcyon days at this
hospitable table Michael Angelo met such men as Massilio
Ficino, the interpreter of Plato; Pico della Mirandola,
the phoenix of erudition; Luigi Pulci and Angelo Poliziano&mdash;the
latter is supposed to have incited Michael Angelo
to carve the bas-relief<note place="foot"><p>All the works of Michael Angelo, whether sculpture, painting, or
drawing partake of the nature of bas-relief, that old Tuscan art
developed to such good purpose by the Florentines. The marks of his
chisel hatch out the forms and develop the planes just as the parallel
strokes of his pen cut out the reliefs of his drawings from the paper. His
method of sculpture in the round was that of a carver of bas-reliefs.
He gradually cut away the background more and more until the relief
was actually the highest relief possible, the round. Every piece of
sculpture Michael Angelo executed is the better for a background,
whether niche or wall, for they all partake of this bas-relief nature;
and his paintings and drawings may every one of them be thought of
as bas-reliefs, and so it is with all the works of the Florentines, his
contemporaries and predecessors. Space and distance never entered
into their calculations before the time of Piero di Cosimo and his pupil
Andrea del Sarto, and even then with but indifferent results. They
were all content with the flat bas-relief effects familiar to them in the
gates of the Baptistry and the jewel-like decorations of the Campanile.
Their favourite problem was the expression of force by form, and no
art was so useful for that purpose as bas-relief, because of its fixed
main lines of composition and its absolute power of expressing the
detail of the action of muscle and bone.</p></note> now in the Casa Buonarroti,
<pb n="103" /><anchor id="Pg103" />called by Condivi "The rape of Deianeira and the battle of
the Centaurs." This is the earliest work that we know
from the master's hand to which we can give a date; it
already shows his double love for the Hellenistic and for
the Tuscan styles. The degree of relief is alto-rilievo,
like those on the Roman sarcophagi and the pulpits of the
Pisani; in shape it is almost as high as it is long; this
unusual proportion is similar to some of the divisions
of the bronze reliefs in the Donatello pulpits at San
Lorenzo. The struggling figures, Centaurs, and Lapithæ,
already exhibit Michael Angelo's power over rhythm of
line in a crowded composition as in the later groups of
"Moses raising the Serpent in the Wilderness," and "The
Last Judgment," both in the Sistine Chapel. The method
is extraordinarily free for so young a sculptor; he evidently
thinks out his work as it proceeds; his delight in the
beauty of the male human form is shown in every figure.
Some critics have been unable to distinguish the figure of
Deianeira, as her form has been so little differentiated or
emphasised by the master. She is towards the left of the
<pb n="104" /><anchor id="Pg104" />composition; a man holds her by the hair of her head. The
centre figures and the two at the lower corners remind us
forcibly of the pulpits of San Lorenzo.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image03" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image03.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE ANGEL AT THE SHRINE OF SAINT DOMINIC</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">BOLOGNA<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #3</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Vasari mentions another bas-relief executed at this
period, a seated Madonna with the Infant Jesus, in the
manner of Donatello; the inferior bas-relief, now in the
Casa Buonarroti, is said to be this work. If the club-shaped
feet and thick hands of the Madonna are compared
with the beautiful long feet and graceful hands of the
angel holding a candlestick, at San Domenico, in Bologna,
certainly by Michael Angelo, it cannot be supposed that
these two works were either executed or even designed
by the same artist. The pose of the Holy Child in the
Madonna bas-relief has been arranged by some one who
has seen "The Day" on the tomb of Giuliano at San
Lorenzo; in the background are children on a stairway,
somewhat in the style of Donatello, but they are more
like imitations of the later works of Michael Angelo.
The folds of the draperies are like the folds of some
silken material, whereas the folds of the robe of the angel
at San Domenico are large, like the folds of a blanket,
a characteristic of all the draperies designed by the
master. This bas-relief, now in the Casa Buonarroti,
was presented to Cosimo dè Medici, first Grand Duke of
Tuscany, by Michael Angelo's nephew Leonardo,<note place="foot"><p>Leonardo may have shown it to Vasari also as an early work of
the master's; Condivi does not mention it.</p></note> as a
work by his uncle, but we do not know that Leonardo was
a good judge of his uncle's works, and this bas-relief was
supposed to have been executed more than fifty years
before its presentation; afterwards it came back into the
possession of the Buonarroti family, and was presented by
<pb n="105" /><anchor id="Pg105" />them to the city of Florence along with the house in Via
Ghibellina.</p>

<p>Michael Angelo, like all young artists who have had the
opportunity, drew and studied in the Brancacci Chapel of
the Church of the Carmine, containing the frescoes of
Masaccio and his followers; the result of these studies
may be seen in some of the compositions, and especially in
the draperies of the Sistine ceiling. There are two pen-drawings
in Vienna that show us the sort of work Michael
Angelo did at this time: one represents a kneeling figure,
evidently from a picture by Pesellino; the other, two
standing figures, that might be after Ghirlandaio. The
draperies have been specially studied. Another pen-drawing,
in the Louvre, is a careful study from Giotto's fresco
of the Resurrection of St. John in the Cappella Peruzzi
at Santa Croce.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>A gloom was cast over all Italy by the death of
Lorenzo de' Medici on April 8, 1492. Michael Angelo
lost his best friend and returned to his father's house; here
he worked upon a statue of Hercules that stood in the
Strozzi Palace until the siege of Florence in 1530, when
Giovanni Battista della Palla bought it and sent it into
France as a present to the French King. It is lost.</p>

<p>In the year 1495, whilst living with Aldovrandi at
Bologna, as Condivi tells us, Michael Angelo, for the sum
of thirty ducats, completed the drapery of a San Petronio,
begun by Nicolo di Bari on the arca or shrine of San
Domenico, and carved the very beautiful and highly
finished statuette of an angel holding a candlestick, still
to be seen there.<note place="foot"><p>The cast of an angel from this shrine at the Victoria and Albert
Museum, South Kensington, is not from the one carved by Michael
Angelo, nor is it of his school as the label states; it is probably by
Nicolo del Arca. Michael Angelo's figure is the companion angel on
the other side of the altar.</p></note></p>

<p><pb n="106" /><anchor id="Pg106" />When Michael Angelo returned to Florence a government
had been established by Savonarola. No doubt,
like all the other citizens, the master listened to the voice
of the preacher, but we have no evidence that he was
particularly influenced by his teaching, though many of his
biographers would have us believe that Savonarola made
him Protestant, Lutheran, or what not, according to the
sect of the biographer. Michael Angelo loved the sermons
of the eloquent Frate as works of art; no doubt, if the
prophets of the Sistine could speak, they would preach
with the voice of Savonarola.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Michael Angelo set to work and carved a San
Giovannino for Lorenzo di Pier Francesco, a cousin of the
exiled Medici. The Berlin Museum acquired, in 1880, a
marble statue of a young St. John, which had been placed
in the palace of the Counts Gualandi Rosselmini, at Pisa,
in 1817, and was rediscovered there in 1874. It is supposed
to be this San Giovannino by Michael Angelo, though
it has nothing of the large quality of Michael Angelo's
work. Donatello has been suggested as the author, but it
has still less of the square planes and ascetic character of
the great Donato. It is a charming, almost a cloying
statue. St. John seems to find his honeycomb distinctly
sweet.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="107" /><anchor id="Pg107" /><head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">THE BACCHUS, AND THE MADONNA DELLA PIETÀ
OF SAINT PETER'S</head>

<p>The story of a Cupid, carved and coloured in imitation
of the antique, is given by Condivi.<note place="foot"><p>See p. 21.</p></note> It was the cause of
Michael Angelo's first visit to Rome. As soon as he
reached the Eternal City he set to work at his sculpture,
as the purchase of a piece of marble mentioned in his letter
to Pier Francesco de' Medici, sent to Florence under cover
to Sandro Botticelli,<note place="foot"><p>Probably because it was dangerous to write to any member of the
Medici family. It proves to us that Michael Angelo and Sandro
Botticelli were on confidential terms.</p></note> indicates. During the whole of this
very important visit he worked in marble. We have,
however, one record of a cartoon by him for a Saint
Francis receiving the Stigmata, to be painted by a certain
barber; but that is all. He studied the works of antique
art and imitated the finish and softness of the Hellenic
style: marbles of debased Greek workmanship abound to
this day in the Roman collections. Messer Jacopo Gallo,
a Roman gentleman and a banker, commissioned a
Bacchus, now in the Bargello at Florence, and a Cupid, said
to be the statue now in the Victoria and Albert Museum,
South Kensington. Condivi records these commissions.<note place="foot"><p>See p. 24.</p></note>
<pb n="108" /><anchor id="Pg108" />This Bacchus is the least dignified work that Michael
Angelo ever executed. Perhaps, like a young artist
struggling to get on, he listened too much to the wishes
and suggestions of his intelligent patron. The finish and
the truth to nature of the unpleasant youth are exquisite.
The folds of the skin and the softness of the flesh are
perfectly rendered, but the work is repulsive, save for the
mischievous little Satyr who steals the grapes; he seems to
take us out into the open air, and away from the fumes of
the wine shop. Condivi calls the second statue a Cupid,<note place="foot"><p>See p. 25.</p></note> but
Springer points out<note place="foot"><p>Vol. i. p. 22.</p></note> that Ulisse Aldovrandi, who saw the
statue in Messer Gallo's house at Rome, talks of an Apollo
quite naked, with a quiver at his side and an urn at his
feet. The work, Cupid or Apollo, at Kensington, is not
so finely finished as the other statues of this first Roman
period; the head is like a copy of the head of the David,
the division between the pectoral muscles is weak, and
their attachments to the breast-bone are round, regular,
and without distinction, very different from either the
naturalism of the Bacchus, the delicate truth of the Pietà,
or the dignified abstraction of the David, done very
shortly afterwards. This work at Kensington was discovered
some fifty years ago in the cellars of the Gualfonda
(Rucellai) Gardens by Professor Miliarini and
the sculptor Santarelli. The left arm was broken, the
right hand damaged, and the hair unfinished, as may be
seen to-day; Santarelli restored the arm. The statue is
like the work of a poor imitator. A work by Michael
Angelo may easily have been destroyed in troublous
times, but can never have been lost and forgotten.
He has always had lovers in every age; unlike the
<pb n="109" /><anchor id="Pg109" />primitives and the quattrocentisti, he has never been out
of fashion.</p>

<p>Whilst Michael Angelo was working away in Rome
he was much troubled by family affairs in Florence. After
the expulsion of the Medici in 1495, Lodovico lost his
post at the Customs, and his three younger sons appear to
have been put into trade. Buonarroto, who was the only
sensible one left at home, and dearly loved by Michael
Angelo, was born in 1477; he was sent to serve in the
Strozzi cloth warehouse in the Porta Rossa. All the noble
families of Florence practised some trade, in order that
they might share in the Government. Giovan Simone,
another brother, born in 1479, led a vagabond life until he
joined Buonarroto in a cloth business that was bought for
them by Michael Angelo. Sigismondo, born in 1481, was
a soldier. At the age of forty he settled down on the
small paternal farm at Settignano, and became a mere
peasant, very much to the annoyance and chagrin of his
famous brother, Michael Angelo, who spent his earnings
for the advantage of his brothers, and the advancement of
his family, with a kindness and generosity as beautiful as it
is rare. Francesca, the mother of Michael Angelo and
of the other sons of Lodovico Buonarroti, was married to
him in 1472. When she died is not known, but Lodovico
married his second wife Lucrezia in 1485. She died childless
in 1497, and was buried upon July 9 in the Church of
Santa Croce.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>In the year 1497 Buonarroto visited Rome, and informed
Michael Angelo, the only hope of the family, of their
pecuniary troubles. Michael Angelo wrote kindly to his
father:</p>

<pb n="110" /><anchor id="Pg110" /><quote rend="display">
<p rend="text-align: center">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Domino Lodovico Buonarroti</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">"In the name of God, the 19th day of August, 1497.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dearest Father</hi>, &amp;c.&mdash;Bonarroto arrived on Friday;
as soon as I knew of it I went to seek him at the inn, and
he told me by word of mouth how you are doing, and
informed me that Consiglio, the mercer, annoys you very
much, and will not, by any means, come to an agreement,
and that he wishes to have you arrested. I tell you that
you must satisfy him and pay him some ducats on account;
and whatever you agree to pay him for the balance, send
and tell me, and I will send it to you, if you have it not;
although I have but little myself, as I have told you, I
will contrive to borrow it, so that you need not take money
out of the Monte,<note place="foot"><p>The "Monte di Pietà" is a savings-bank and pawn-broker's,
established by the state or city.</p></note> as Bonarroto says. Do not wonder
that I have sometimes written irritably, for I often get
very angry, owing to the many annoyances that happen to
one away from his home.</p>

<p>"I had an order to do a work for Piero de' Medici and
bought the marble; but I never began it because he did
not do as he had promised, so I stayed at home and
carved a figure for my pleasure. I bought a piece of
marble for five ducats; it was not good; the money was
thrown away. Afterwards I bought another piece, another
five ducats, and worked at it for my pleasure; so you must
believe that I also have expenses and troubles, and you
must make allowances. I will send you the money, though
I should have to sell myself into slavery.</p>

<p>"Buonarroto arrived in safety and has returned to his
inn; he has a room; he is all right and lacks nothing for
<pb n="111" /><anchor id="Pg111" />as long as he likes to stay. I have no accommodation for
him to stay with me, because I am living in another's house.
It suffices that I do not let him want for anything. Well,
as I hope you are.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome."</p>

<p>(In the hand of Lodovico.)</p>

<p>"He says he will help me to pay Consiglio."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, ii. p. 4.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>Nevertheless, Milanesi tells us in a note, Lodovico
settled with Consiglio, to whom he owed ninety gold florins,
in the way Michael Angelo did not approve and after
going to law about it. A letter of Lodovico's refers to
the kindness of Michael Angelo in establishing his brothers
in the cloth business. It is dated December 19, 1500. "...
and more, I know that you have advanced money, and the
love you have for your brothers; it is a great consolation
to me. About this matter of the money with which you
wish to set up Buonarroto and Giansimone in a shop, I
have hunted and I am still hunting, but as yet I have not
found anything to please me. True it is I have my hands
on a good thing, but it is necessary to keep one's eyes
open and to take care not to get into difficulties; I want
to go slowly and with good counsel, and I will tell you all
about it day by day. Buonarroto tells me how you live
yonder, very economically, or rather penuriously; economy
is good, but penuriousness is evil, for it is a vice displeasing
to God and man, and, moreover, it is bad for the body and
soul. Whilst you are young you will be able to bear these
hardships for a time, but when the strength of youth fails
you, disease and infirmities will develop, for they are
engendered by hardship, mean living, and penurious
<pb n="112" /><anchor id="Pg112" />habits. As I said, economy is good. But, above all, do
not be penurious; live moderately and do not stint yourself;
above all things avoid hardships, because in your art,
if you fall ill (which God forbid), you are a lost man;
above all things have a care of your head, keep it moderately
warm, and never wash; have yourself rubbed down, but
never wash. Buonarroto also tells me that you have a
swelling on your side; it comes from hardship or fatigue,
or from eating something bad and windy, or suffering the
feet to be cold or damp. I have had one myself, and it
still troubles me when I eat windy food, or when I endure
cold or such like things. Our Francesco formerly had one,
too, and also Gismondo similarly. Be careful about it
because it is dangerous."</p>

<p>The name of Michael Angelo's good friend, Jacopo
Gallo, appears in the agreement drawn up concerning
the crowning work of this the first Roman period,
the Pietà, called the Madonna della Febbre, first placed in
the Chapel of Santa Petronilla, and now in the Chapel of
Santa Maria della Febbre, on the right of the entrance
to St. Peters, in Rome. The commission for this work
was given by the Cardinal Jean de la Grostaye de Villiers
François, Abbot of St. Denis, called in Italy Cardinal di
San Dionigi. It is dated August 26, 1498.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image04" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image04.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE MADONNA BELLA PIETÀ</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SAINT PETER'S, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission, of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #4</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>"Be it known and manifest to whoso shall read the
ensuing document, how the Most Reverend Cardinal of
San Dionigi has agreed with the master, Michael Angelo,
sculptor of Florence, that the said master shall make a Pietà
of marble at his own cost; that is, a Virgin Mary clothed,
with the dead Christ in her arms, of the size of a proper
<pb n="113" /><anchor id="Pg113" />man, for the price of four hundred and fifty golden Papal
ducats, within the term of one year from the day of the
beginning of the work" (the Cardinal agrees to pay certain
sums in advance). The contract concludes: "And I, Jacopo
Gallo, promise to his Most Reverend Monsignore that the
said Michael Angelo will finish the said work within one
year, and that it shall be the most beautiful work in
marble which Rome to-day can show, and that no master
of our days shall be able to produce a better. And
similarly I promise the said Michael Angelo that the Most
Reverend Cardinal will disburse the payments as written
above; and in good faith, I, Jacopo Gallo, have made the
present writing with my own hand, according to date of
year, month, and day, as above."<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, ii. p. 33 (Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Jacopo's boast and promise were justified, for even
now there is no finer complete work of sculpture in the
whole of Rome than the Pietà at St. Peter's. It is said
that Michael Angelo overheard certain Lombards ascribe
the Pietà to their own sculptor, Cristoforo Solari, called
"Il Gobbo." He therefore carved his name upon the
belt of the Madonna's robe. He never signed any other
work. Nothing closes the great period of the fifteenth
century so fitly as the Pietà of Michael Angelo, prophesying
at the same time the power of the art of the
sixteenth.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="114" /><anchor id="Pg114" /><head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE DAVID AND THE CARTOON OF PISA</head>

<p>Family affairs recalled Michael Angelo to Florence in the
spring of 1501. He returned full of honours gained
in Rome, and took up his position as the first sculptor
of the day. His next commission came from Cardinal
Francesco Piccolomini, afterwards Pope Pius III. A contract
was signed on June 5, 1501, by which Michael
Angelo agreed to complete some fifteen statues of male
saints within the time of three years, for the Piccolomini
Chapel, in the Duomo of Siena. A Saint Francis was
begun by Piero Torrigiano, and may have been finished
by Michael Angelo. The rest of the four works that were
the outcome of this commission can have had nothing to
do with the chisel of the sculptor of the Madonna della
Febbre and the David. Michael Angelo must have
merely contracted to supply them, as the master sculptor
of a sculptor's yard, possibly furnishing the designs himself.
There is a drawing at the British Museum of a
bearded saint, cowled and holding a book in his left hand,
which may be a design for one of these inferior works.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image05" />
<figure rend="w65" url="images/image05.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>DAVID</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE ACADEMY, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #5</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image06" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image06.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>DAVID</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">IN THE PIAZZA<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #6</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image07" />
<figure rend="w55" url="images/image07.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>SAINT MATTHEW</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE COURT OF THE ACADEMY, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #7</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>In August of the same year, 1501, Michael Angelo
began the colossal statue of David, that used to stand in
the Piazza and is now in the Academy at Florence. The
first contract for this work, signed between Michael
<pb n="115" /><anchor id="Pg115" />Angelo, the Arte della Lana, and the Opera del Duomo,
is dated August 16, 1501. It states "That the worthy
master, Michael Angelo, son of Lodovico Bonarroti, citizen
of Florence, has been chosen to fashion, complete, and
perfectly finish the male statue, already rough hewn and
called the giant, of nine cubits in height,<note place="foot"><p>Nine cubits = 5.31 metres, or 13 feet 6 inches.</p></note> now existing in
the workshop of the Cathedral, badly blocked out afore-time
by Master Agostino,<note place="foot"><p>Agostino di Duccio.</p></note> of Florence. The work shall
be completed within the term of the next ensuing two
years, dating from September, at a salary of six golden
florins<note place="foot"><p>Gotti estimates six golden florins at 57.60 francs, or about <hi rend="font-style: italic">£2 6s</hi>.</p></note> per month; and whatever is needful for the
accomplishment of this task, as workmen, wood, &amp;c., which
he may require, shall be supplied him by the said Operai;
and when the said statue is finished, the Consuls and Operai,
who shall be in office, shall estimate whether he deserve a
larger recompense, and this shall be left to their consciences."
Michael Angelo began to work in a wooden
shed, erected for that purpose near the Cathedral, on
Monday morning, September 13, 1501, and the "David"
is said to be almost entirely finished in a note, dated
January 25, 1503,<note place="foot"><p>S.C. 1504. See "Le Lettere," &amp;c., p. 620.</p></note> when a solemn council of the most
important artists, then resident in Florence, met at the
Opera del Duomo to consider where the statue should be
placed. What an original way of deciding æsthetic questions!
They came to the admirable conclusion that the
choice of the site should be left to Michael Angelo.
Amongst those who spoke at the meeting were Francesco
Monciatto, a wood carver, who suggested that the statue
<pb n="116" /><anchor id="Pg116" />should be erected in front of the Duomo, where the block
was originally meant to be set up; he was supported by
the painters Cosimo Rosselli and Sandro Botticelli. Giuliano
da San Gallo proposed to place it under the Loggia
dei Lanzi, because "the imperfection of the marble, which
is softened by exposure to the air, renders the durability
of the statue doubtful." Messer Angelo de Lorenzo Manfidi
(second herald) objected because it would break the
order of certain ceremonies held in the Loggia. Leonardo
da Vinci followed San Gallo; he did not think it would
injure the ceremonies. Salvestro, a jeweller, and Filippino
Lippi supported Piero di Cosimo, who proposed that the
precise spot should be left to the sculptor who made it,
"as he will know better how it should be." Michael
Angelo elected to have his David set up on the steps of
the Palazzo Vecchio, on the right side of the entrance. Its
effect in that position may be well seen, appropriately
enough, in a picture by the same Piero di Cosimo (No. 895),
in the National Gallery, where the Piazza della Signoria
forms the background to a portrait of a man in armour.
Il Cronaca, Antonio da San Gallo, Baccio d'Agnolo, Bernardo
della Cecca, and Michael Angelo were associated
in the task of transporting the giant from the workshop
near the Duomo to the Piazza della Signoria. It was
encased in planks and suspended upright from great beams.
"On May 14, 1504, the marble giant was dragged from
the Opera. It came out at twenty-four o'clock, and they
broke the wall above the door enough to let it pass.
That night some stones were thrown at the Colossus with
intent to injure it; a watch had to be set over it at night,
and it made way very slowly, bound as it was upright,
suspended so that the feet were off the ground by enormous
<pb n="117" /><anchor id="Pg117" />beams with much ingenuity. It took four days to
reach the Piazza, arriving on the 18th at the hour of twelve.
More than forty men were employed to make it go, and
there were fourteen logs to go beneath it, which were
changed from hand to hand. Afterwards they worked
until June 8, 1504, to place it on a pedestal where the
Judith used to stand. The Judith was removed and set
upon the ground within the palace. The said giant was the
work of Michael Angelo Buonarroti."<note place="foot"><p>A contemporary account, Gotti, vol. i. p. 29.</p></note> The great marble
David stood in the Piazza three hundred and sixty-nine
years; it was removed to the hall of the Accademia delle
Belle Arti in 1873 for its better preservation. It has suffered
very little from its exposure in the fine air of Florence, but
the left arm was broken by a huge stone thrown during the
tumults of 1527. Giorgio Vasari and his friend Cecchino
Salviati collected the broken pieces and brought them to
the house of Michael Angelo Salviati, father of Cecchino.
They were carefully put together and restored to the
statue in 1543. The David was the first work by Michael
Angelo that displayed the awe-inspiring quality known as
his <hi rend="font-style: italic">Terribilità</hi>; from the fierce frown of the brow to the
sharp, strained forms of the feet and toes there is an
expression of strenuous force struggling against an almost
overwhelming power. The force of the David may succeed
against Goliath; but in Michael Angelo's later works the
struggle always appears to be a hopeless one, nobly as his
Titans fight against fate and omnipotence. The face of
the David is a development of the Saint George of Or
San Michele, by Donatello, and the figure is of the same
type, only this triumphant boy of Michael Angelo's shows
a more exact study of the antique than the naturalistic
<pb n="118" /><anchor id="Pg118" />work of his master. In Donatello the planes are given as
flat, and their junctions are sharp and hard; in Michael
Angelo they are carefully rounded and finished with the
grace of the antique and of life. The details of the
head, although so high up, are so absolutely perfect that
the separate features have been, and are still, the models
set before all students of art when they first begin to
study the human figure, and they are known as <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi>
nose, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi> eye, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi> ear, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi> mouth. We have noticed
that the young student is more interested in his work
when he is told that they are the features of <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi> David.
Michael Angelo carved his giant without modelling a full-size
clay figure first, but with the guidance of drawings
and small wax models about eighteen inches high only,
carving the figure out of the block in the way that is so
well seen in the unfinished Saint Matthew in the court of
the Accademia delle Belle Arti, in Florence. There are
two small wax models of the David in the Casa Buonarroti
at Florence, said to be Michael Angelo's designs for this
figure, but they are of very doubtful authority. Later in
his life he is said to have worked from full-sized models, as
Benvenuto Cellini tells us in his <hi rend="font-style: italic">Trattati dell' Oreficeria</hi>, &amp;c.<note place="foot"><p>Firenze: Le Monnier, 1857, p. 197.</p></note>
Vasari tells the story of how Michael Angelo contented
the Gonfaloniere and silenced his criticism of the David:
"While still surrounded by the scaffolding Pier Soderini
inspected the statue, which pleased him immensely, and
when Michael Angelo was re-touching it in parts, Soderini
said to him that the nose appeared to him too big.
Michael Angelo, knowing that the Gonfaloniere was close
under the statue and that from this point of view the
truth was not to be discerned, mounted the scaffolding,
<pb n="119" /><anchor id="Pg119" />which was as high as the shoulder of the giant, and
quickly took a chisel in his left hand with a little of the
marble dust from the platform and began to let fall a
little of it at each touch of the tool, but he did not alter
the nose from what it was before; then he looked down to
the Gonfaloniere, who stood watching below: 'Look at it
now,' said Michael Angelo. 'I like it better. You have
given it life,' said the Gonfaloniere," rubbing the dust out
of his eyes.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>On August 12, 1502, Michael Angelo undertook
another commission for the Republic&mdash;another giant
David. This time it was to be in bronze, two cubits and
a quarter in height; in the casting he was to be assisted
by Benedetto da Rovezzano. It has been suggested that
the pen and ink drawing in the Louvre is a design for this
second David, but the drawing of an arm on the same
sheet is so like the right arm of the first David that it is
more probably an early idea for the first David, in which
we see that Michael Angelo's design needed more room than
the cramped block of marble allowed; it makes us wonder
the more at the marvellous freedom of action that he
managed to get out of the cramped stone. The bronze
David was intended for the French statesman, Pierre de
Rohan, Maréchal de Gié, as a present from the Florentine
Republic, but before it was finished the Maréchal fell into
disgrace and could be of no further use to the Florentines.
The Signory therefore determined to send the bronze to
Florimond Robertet, Secretary of Finance to the French
King. A minute of the Signory dated November 6, 1508,
informs us that the bronze David, weighing about 800
pounds, had been "packed in the name of God," and sent
<pb n="120" /><anchor id="Pg120" />to Signa on its way to Leghorn. Florimond Robertet
placed it in the courtyard of his château of Bury, near
Blois. It remained there for more than a hundred years,
then it was removed to the château of Villeroy, and
disappeared no one knows whither.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>On April 24, 1503, the Consuls of the Arte della
Lana and the Operai of the Duomo ordered Michael
Angelo to carve out of Carrara marble twelve Apostles,
each four and a quarter cubits high, to be placed inside
the church. One was to be finished each year, the Operai
paying all expenses, including the cost of living for the
sculptor and his assistants, and paying him two golden
florins a month. They built a house and workshops for
him in the Borgo Pinti; it was designed by Il Cronaca.
Michael Angelo lived there rent free until it was evident
that the contract could not be carried out. He then hired
it on a lease, but on June 15, 1508, the lease of the house
was transferred to Sigismondo Martelli. The St. Matthew,
now in the courtyard of the Accademia delle Belle Arti, in
Florence, is the only work we know of resulting from this
commission. The apostle is just emerging from the
marble, and shows us Michael Angelo's method of work.
Vasari says: "At this time he also began a statue in
marble of San Matteo in the works of Santa Maria del
Fiore, which, though but roughly hewn, shows his perfections,
and teaches sculptors how to carve figures from the
stone without maiming them, always gaining ground by
cutting away the waste stone, and being able to draw back
or alter in case of need." The deep chisel marks in the
stone are sometimes as much as four inches long, and their
directions indicate that Michael Angelo worked equally well
<pb n="121" /><anchor id="Pg121" />with either hand, a fact confirmed by Raffaello de Montelupo
in his "Autobiographie."<note place="foot"><p>Perkins "Tuscan Sculptors," vol. ii. p. 74.</p></note> "Here I may mention
that I am in the habit of drawing with my left hand, and
that once, at Rome, while I was sketching the arch of
Trajan from the Colosseum, Michael Angelo and Sebastiano
del Piombo, both of whom were naturally left-handed
(although they did not work with the left hand excepting
when they wished to use great strength), stopped to see
me, and expressed great wonder."</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image08" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image08.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE MADONNA AND CHILD, WITH THE CHILD SAINT JOHN</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE BARGELLO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #8</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The Florentine love of bas-relief explains to some
extent their extreme devotion to the tondo, or circular
shape, in paintings and in sculptures. According to Vasari,
it was at this time that Michael Angelo carved two tondi:
one for Bartolommeo Pitti, now in the Bargello at Florence,
and the other for Taddeo Taddei, now at Burlington House,
in the Diploma Gallery of the Royal Academy, London.
It was acquired by Sir George Beaumont, and is the most
valuable work the Academy possesses. If it were in an
out-of-the-way palace in Florence many of us would see it
more frequently than we do now, although we have only
to climb a few steps to visit this glorious work any day we
are in Piccadilly. Both of these reliefs represent the
Madonna and Child, with the child St. John. The one
in the Bargello appears to be the earlier; the composition
is very beautiful and simple, and fills the circular space
admirably. The Madonna is seated facing the spectator,
and looks out full towards him with an enigmatical expression
on her proud features; the Child stands beside
her, His elbow on her knee, as in the Bruges Madonna.
The St. John is only roughly cut, but the movement and
forms are so well realised under the marble that one does
<pb n="122" /><anchor id="Pg122" />not wish for any further finish. In the Royal Academy
tondo the Madonna is seated more to the side of the circle,
and is in profile; the Child reclines upon her knee, clinging
to her arm, startled but interested by the little bird
St. John has brought to show Him (a favourite motive
with Italian artists). The head and shoulders of the
Madonna and the torso of the Child Jesus are the only
parts that are near completion, yet the whole group is so
much there that we do not ask for another touch; in fact,
the works of Michael Angelo were finished from the very
first strokes. The rough charcoal drawing upon the block
of marble, could we see it, would have been complete to us,
only Michael Angelo could add anything to it; and so it
is with every fragment of stone or other piece of work by
his hand, from the lightest charcoal drawing to the great
marble fragments in the grotto of the Boboli Gardens.
They are complete to us; the thing he thought is there,
and the art is there, and we are satisfied.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image09" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image09.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE HOLY FAMILY</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE UFFIZI, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a photograph by Sig. D. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #9</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Another tondo executed about this time is the painting
now in the Uffizi, the only easel picture known with
certainty to be by the hand of Michael Angelo. This
Holy Family, with naked shepherds in the background,
was painted for Angelo Doni, the same man whose portrait
was painted by Raphael. Vasari says that Michael Angelo
asked seventy ducats for the work, but that Doni only
offered forty when the picture was delivered. Michael
Angelo sent word that he must pay a hundred or send
back the picture. Doni offered the original seventy; but
Michael Angelo replied that if he was bent on bargaining,
he should not pay less than one hundred and forty. In
this composition the Madonna is seated upon the ground,
forming a pyramid, of which the heads of Joseph and the
<pb n="123" /><anchor id="Pg123" />Child form the apex; her lithe and strong form has a
Greek loveliness as she turns quickly and receives the
beautiful Child on to her shoulder from the arms of
Joseph. Never in any painting have the drawing and
modelling of the human figure been so perfectly executed
as in the figure of this Child and the arms of the Madonna;
the hands and feet are modelled with the delicacy of a
Flemish miniature, and at the same time have a beauty
and suavity of modelling and a magnificent choice of line
altogether Italian. On either side of the central triangle
the spaces between it and the circumference of the tondo
are filled by the introduction of the infant St. John
and some nude shepherds; the landscape background is
austere as the mountain tops of some primeval world
where such titanic beings as these of Michael Angelo's
alone could dwell. The old painters loved to decorate
their Madonna pictures with all the most beautiful things
they could think of, or most loved. The Florentines with
fair and pleasant gardens; the Umbrians with spacious
colonnades, distant landscapes, and rare skies; the Venetians
with fruits and garlands of foliage and fruit, and even
vegetables, if they had a particular regard for them, as
Crivelli had for the cucumber. One painter only before
this time decorated his pictures with nude human figures,
Luca Signorelli. Michael Angelo may have seen a
Madonna of his, with two nude figures in the background,
executed for Lorenzo de' Medici, and now hung in the
Gallery of the Uffizi. Michael Angelo, who knew the
beauty of the human form better than any one, would
never be content to decorate his tondo with any less
beautiful offering after seeing this picture by Signorelli.
The tondo form was a favourite one with Signorelli. His
<pb n="124" /><anchor id="Pg124" />two pictures of this shape in Florence perhaps helped
Michael Angelo in the three compositions we have been
considering; and this is the only debt Michael Angelo owes
to the Umbrian painter. Their way of looking at the nude
and their ideals of its beauty are so absolutely different,
the one from the other, that possibly the Florentine could
hardly bear to look at the work of the Umbrian.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image10" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image10.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE CARTOON OF PISA</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">FROM THE MONOCHROME AT HOLKHAM HALL<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Earl of Leicester</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #10</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>In August 1504, Michael Angelo was commissioned
to prepare cartoons for the decoration of a wall in the
Sala del Gran Consiglio in the Palazzo Vecchio, opposite
the wall for which Leonardo da Vinci was already preparing
designs. Michael Angelo had a workshop given
him in the Hospital of the Dyers at San Onofrio, under
the date October 31, 1504; a minute of expenditure shows
that paper for the cartoon was provided. Leonardo's
design was the famous "Fight for the Standard." Michael
Angelo chose an episode from the war with Pisa, when,
on July 28, 1364, a band of four hundred Florentines
were surprised bathing in the Arno by Sir John Hawkwood
(Giovanni Acuto) and his cavalry, then in the service of
the Pisans, a subject that enabled Michael Angelo to
express his delight in the beauty of the human form, and
his power of drawing and foreshortening the naked limbs
of the bathers as they hurry out of the river and don their
armour at the sound of the alarm. This great central
work of Michael Angelo's prime has disappeared, and we
must be very careful in studying it to allow for the
weakness of the work of the copyists and engravers
who preserved what little record of it is left for us,
especially in the drawing of the nude. If we compare
the vault of the Sistine Chapel with the contemporary
<pb n="125" /><anchor id="Pg125" />engravings we shall be able to estimate the enormous
difference between the cartoon, which may have been the
greatest work of art produced in Italy, and the copies of
it that exist. The most complete copy of the cartoon
is the monochrome painting belonging to the Earl of
Leicester, at Holkham Hall. There is a sketch of the
whole composition in the Albertina Gallery at Vienna, and
the line engraving by Marc Antonio Raimondi of three
principal figures with a foolish Italian rendering of a
German engraved landscape in the background, utterly
destroying what little Michael Angelesque dignity the
engraver was able to get into the figures, with his poor
knowledge of the nude. The best remnants we have are
some few of Michael Angelo's own studies from the nude,
done especially for this composition; they are full of the
power, vigour, and naturalism peculiar to this period, rude
forms hacked out of the paper with a broad pen, altered
with charcoal, chalk, white paint, or anything handy and
effective; from them we must try and imagine the power,
breadth and dignity of the great composition. The work
was done upon ordinary paper, stretched over canvas or
linen fixed on a wooden frame, like the few cartoons by
the great masters that have come down to us. The outlines
were usually pricked, and when finished the cartoon was
cut into convenient sizes for pouncing on the wall or other
foundation upon which the picture was to be painted,
unless the artist took the precaution of putting a plain
piece of paper under the original drawing and pricking
both together and transferring the outlines by the aid of
the second sheet. These cut-up cartoons became the
property of the whole workshop, and were used by the
pupils when they wished. No doubt the roughness of
<pb n="126" /><anchor id="Pg126" />this treatment soon destroyed many of them. Vasari,
who cannot have seen the Cartoon of Pisa, gives us a
long, enthusiastic description of it, ending with some
helpful notes as to the materials with which it was drawn,
and an account of its effect upon contemporary artists.
He continues: "In addition, you discovered groups of
figures sketched in various methods, some outlined with
charcoal, some shaded with lines, some rubbed in, some
heightened with white-lead, the master having sought to
prove his empire over all materials of draughtsmanship.<note place="foot"><p>This reason given by Vasari for the use of various mediums is
just the sort of reason he would have had himself for using them.
Michael Angelo merely used different materials because it was the best
way of getting the different effects he wanted, or, sometimes possibly,
because they happened to be handy.</p></note>
The craftsmen of design remained therewith astonished
and dumbfounded, recognising the fullest reaches of their
art revealed to them by this unrivalled masterpiece.
Those who examined the forms I have described, painters
who inspected and compared them with works hardly less
divine, affirm that never in the history of human achievement
was any product of man's brain seen like to them in
mere supremacy. And certainly we have the right to
believe this; for when the cartoon was finished and carried
to the hall of the Pope, amid the acclamation of all
artists and to the exceeding fame of Michael Angelo,
the students who made drawings from it, as happened
with foreigners and natives through many years in
Florence, became men of mark in several branches.
This is obvious, for Aristotele da San Gallo worked
there, as did Ridolfo Grillandaio, Rafael Santio da Urbino,
Francesco Granaccio, Baccio Bandinelli, and Alonso
<pb n="127" /><anchor id="Pg127" />Berugetta, the Spaniard; they were followed by Andrea
del Sarto, il Franciabigio, Jacomo Sansovino, il Rosso,
Maturino, Lorenzetto, Tribolo (then a boy), Jacomo da
Puntormo, and Pierin del Vaga, all of them first-rate
masters of the Florentine school."</p>

<p>Benvenuto Cellini's account is important, for he himself
copied the cartoon in 1513 just before it disappeared.
He says: "Michael Angelo portrayed a number of foot
soldiers, who, the season being summer, had gone to bathe
in the Arno. He drew them at the moment the alarm is
sounded, and the men, all naked, rush to arms. So
splendid is their action, that nothing survives of ancient
or of modern art which touches the same lofty point of
excellence; and, as I have already said, the design of the
great Leonardo was itself most admirably beautiful.
These two cartoons stood, one in the Palace of the
Medici, the other in the hall of the Pope. So long as
they remained intact they were the school of the world.
Though the divine Michael Angelo in later life finished
that great chapel of Pope Julius, he never rose half-way
to the same pitch of power; his genius never afterwards
attained to the force of those first studies."</p>

<p>These years spent under the shadow of the Duomo,
away from which no Florentine is happy, working at his
sculptures and drawings, were probably some of the
happiest years of Michael Angelo's whole life.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="128" /><anchor id="Pg128" /><head>CHAPTER IV</head>

<head type="sub">THE FIRST ACT OF THE TRAGEDY OF THE TOMB</head>


<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image11" />
<figure rend="w75" url="images/image11.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>MOSES</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE TOMB OF JULIUS II. SAN PIETRO IN VINCOLI, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of Sig. Giacomo Brogi, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #11</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The cartoon, The Apostles for the Duomo, and all these
works, had to be left unfinished, as Michael Angelo was
summoned to Rome in the beginning of 1505 by Pope
Julius II. From this period Michael Angelo was the
servant, often the unwilling servant, of the Popes (his
Medusa as he said). Much of his time was wasted owing
to the different dispositions and likings of his patrons,
yet we must be thankful to them for the opportunities
they gave him in their great undertakings. Now began
what Condivi called "The Tragedy of the Tomb"; the
phrase is so apt that we imagine he must have got it from
Michael Angelo himself. Julius appears to have appreciated
his artist from the first; both were what the
Italians call <hi rend="font-style: italic">uomini terribili</hi>, men whose brains worked with
furious energy, grand and formidable in their imaginations.
Michael Angelo was packed off to Carrara for
marble as soon as his design was approved. There is a
contract signed by him and two shipowners of Lavagna,
dated November 18, 1505. Thirty-four cartloads of marble
were then ready for shipment, together with two blocked-out
figures. He probably left Carrara soon afterwards,
returning to Rome by way of Florence. The only authoritative
account of the original project of the Tomb is that
<pb n="129" /><anchor id="Pg129" />of Condivi; Vasari's account was not published until his
second edition in 1558. The architectural drawings, said
to be designs for this Tomb, are of doubtful authenticity;
most of them are certainly not by Michael Angelo. We
must therefore study Condivi, who probably got the details
from Michael Angelo himself, though he, too, must have
had great difficulty in recalling the ideas of forty-eight
years ago.<note place="foot"><p>We know how difficult it is to get facts about the works done a
few decades ago, even though the artists be still living; for instance,
how little we know of the cartoon competition held in Westminster
Hall in 1843, or the fresco of Justice painted by Mr. G.F. Watts, R.A.,
in the New Hall of Lincoln's Inn.</p></note> The plans for the new church of St. Peter's,
the largest church in Christendom, were altered to embrace
this huge monument, but a transept of the little church of
San Pietro in Vincoli gave ample space for the final
scheme, when it was set up in 1545. The only statues we
know belonging to it by Michael Angelo are the Moses and
the two bound Slaves in the Louvre; the other six statues
in San Pietro in Vincoli were finished by assistants. The
unfinished marble figures so unworthily housed in the
stupid rock-work grotto of the Boboli Gardens, Florence,
may have been for the Tomb, although their measurements
do not agree with the Slaves of the Louvre. How well
these superlative fragments would look in the corners of
the Loggia dei Lanzi, or in the courtyard of the Bargello.
In the Bargello two groups, the Victory and the Dying
Adonis, may have been originally intended for the Tomb,
but we believe they have been finished and considerably
altered by some later workman; possibly they were only
blocked out by Michael Angelo. The movement of
the figure and the position of the head have been altered
<pb n="130" /><anchor id="Pg130" />in the Victory, and the whole subject of the Adonis has
been changed by the introduction of the insignificant
boar. Vasari tells us that in his time there were, besides
the Moses, Victory, and two Slaves, eight figures blocked
out by Michael Angelo at Rome, and five at Florence;
possibly these five at Florence were the four in the Boboli
Gardens and an earlier state of the Adonis.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>After his flight from Rome in 1506 Michael Angelo
had some six months at Florence, working on his cartoon
in the workshop at the Spedale dei Tintori. When he
went to Julius at Bologna in November it was finished,
and was exhibited in the Sala del Papa at Santa Maria
Novella. All this time Bramante and his set had the
Pope's ear in Rome. He has been accused of suggesting
that Michael Angelo should paint the vault of the Sistine
Chapel, in the hope that he would ignominiously fail in
such an unusual task; but we do not think we can thank
Bramante even for that indirect service, for Michael
Angelo's friend, Pietro Rosselli, wrote on May 6, 1506:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image12" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image12.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>TWO OF THE UNFINISHED MARBLE STATUES IN THE GROTTO OF THE
BOBOLI GARDENS, FLORENCE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #12</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>"Dearest in place of a brother, after salutations and
kind regards:&mdash;I inform you how on Saturday evening,
when the Pope was at supper, I showed him certain designs
that Bramante and I had to examine. When the Pope
had supped and I had showed them to him, he sent for
Bramante and said to him: 'Sangallo goes to Florence
and will bring Michael Angelo back with him.' Bramante
replied to the Pope, and said: 'Holy Father, he will do
no such thing, because I know Michael Angelo well
enough, and he has told me many a time that he will
not undertake the Chapel, which you wanted to put upon
him; and that he intended to apply himself to sculpture
<pb n="131" /><anchor id="Pg131" />all the time and not to painting.' And he said: 'Holy
Father, I believe that he has not courage enough for it,
because he has not painted many figures, and especially
as these will be high up and foreshortened; and that is
quite another thing to painting on the ground.' Then the
Pope replied, and said: 'If he does not come he will do
me wrong, so I think he will return anyhow.' Upon this
I up and abused him soundly there in the presence of the
Pope; and said what I believe you would have said for
me, so that he did not know what to reply, and he
seemed to think he had made a mistake. And I said
further: 'Holy Father, he has never spoken to Michael
Angelo, and as to what he has now told you, if it be
true may you cut my head off, for he never did speak
to Michael Angelo; and I believe he will return by all
means, whenever your Holiness desires.' And so the thing
ended. I have nothing more to tell you. God keep you
from harm. If I can do anything for you let me know;
I will do it willingly. Remember me to Simone il Pollaiuolo."<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. p. 46 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<p>Bramante was not far wrong in what he said about
vault painting. He alluded to the method of foreshortening
employed by his fellow countryman, Melozzo da Forli,
by which he made figures painted on domes and vaults
look as if they were suspended in the air really above the
spectators, and not simply a pattern painted on the surface
of the plaster; this method was perfected by Correggio,
but was never practised successfully by a Florentine.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="132" /><anchor id="Pg132" /><head>CHAPTER V</head>

<head type="sub">THE COLOSSAL BRONZE FOR THE FAÇADE OF
SAN PETRONIO</head>

<p>The Pope entered Bologna in triumph on November 11,
1506, after the marvellous campaign by which he restored
two rich provinces to the Church with only five hundred men-at-arms
and his twenty-four Cardinals. Less than ten days
afterwards he inquired for his artist. The Cardinal of
Pavia wrote an autograph letter to the Signory of Florence
on the 21st, urgently requesting that they would despatch
Michael Angelo immediately to that town, inasmuch as the
Pope was impatient for his arrival, and wanted to employ
him on important works. On November 27 Soderini
wrote to the Cardinal of Pavia introducing Michael Angelo
and praising the cartoon the artist had to leave unpainted,
and to the Cardinal of Volterra more formally as follows:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"The bearer will be Michael Angelo, the sculptor,
whom we send to please and satisfy his Holiness our Lord.
We certify your Lordship that he is a worthy young man,
and in his own art without a peer in Italy; perhaps also in
the universe. We cannot recommend him too highly. He
is of such a nature, that with good words and kindness one
can make him do anything. Show him love and show him
kindness, and he will do things that will make all who see
<pb n="133" /><anchor id="Pg133" />them wonder. We inform your Lordship that he has
begun a story for the Republic which will be admirable,
and also XII Apostles, each 4-1/2 to 5 braccia high, which
will be remarkable. We recommend him to your lordship
as much as we can.</p>

<p>"The XXVII of November, 1506."<note place="foot"><p>Gaye, vol. ii. pp. 83, 84, 85, 91, 93, gives all the correspondence.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>Michael Angelo says in his letter to Fattucci<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. ccclxxxiii.</p></note> that the
portrait he now modelled of Pope Julius was in bronze,
sitting, about seven cubits in height.<note place="foot"><p>About fourteen feet, that is to say, at least three times the size of
life, as it was a sitting figure.</p></note> At the end of the
two years that it took him to finish the work he had to
cast it twice. He says. "I found that I had four and a
half ducats left. I never received anything more for this
work; and all the moneys paid out during the said two
years were the 1000 ducats with which I promised to cast
it." Michael Angelo worked in the Stanza del Pavaglione
behind the Cathedral; he employed three assistants, from
Florence&mdash;Lapo Antonio di Lapo, a sculptor; Lodovico del
Buono, called Lotti, a founder; and Pietro Urbano, a man
who worked for him for a long time. His way of life was
frugal and sordid in the extreme. In his letter to his
brother Buonarroto he says<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. xlviii. p. 61 (in the British Museum).</p></note>:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"With regard to Giovansimone coming here, I do not
advise it as yet, for I am lodged in one wretched room, and
have bought one single bed, in which we all four of us
sleep. And I shall not be able to receive him suitably.
But if he will come all the same, let him wait till I have
<pb n="134" /><anchor id="Pg134" />cast the figure I am doing, and I will send away Lapo and
Lodovico who are helping me, and I will send him a horse
so that he may come decently and not like a beggar. No
more. Pray to God for me that things may go well.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, Sculptor, in Bologna."</p>
</quote>

<p>Another letter tells of a visit from the Pope, troubles
with his workmen, and his usual generosity to his brothers
and father.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto di Lodovico Simone</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Firenze</hi><note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. 1. p. 65 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<p>"To be delivered at the shop of Strozzi, wool merchant,
in the street of the Porta Rossa.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I hear by one of yours how things went
about the little farm; it is a great comfort to me and
pleases me well, if it is a sure thing. Of the affairs of
Baronciello I am well informed, and from what I understand
it is a much more serious thing than you make out;
and for my part, it not being to my taste, I do not ask it.
We are all obliged to do all we can for Baronciello, and so
we will, especially everything that is in our power. You
must know that on Friday evening at twenty-one o'clock
Pope Julius came to my house where I work, and stayed
about half an hour while I was at work; then he gave me
the benediction, and went away, and showed himself well
pleased with what I am doing. For all this we must
thank God heartily; and so I beg you to do, and pray for
me. I inform you further, how that on Friday morning I
sent away Lapo and Lodovico, who were with me. Lapo
I dismissed because he is good for nothing and a rogue,
and would not serve me. Lodovico is better, and I would
<pb n="135" /><anchor id="Pg135" />have kept him another two months; but Lapo, so as not
to be the only one blamed, so corrupted him that they
both had to go. I write this not because I care for them,
for they are not worth three halfpence between them, but
because, if they come to talk to Lodovico, he must not be
surprised. Tell him by no means to lend them his ears;
and if you want to know about them go to Messer Agnolo,
the Herald of the Signoria, for I have written all the
story to him, and he, out of his kindness, will relate it to
you. Of Giovansimone I have heard. I shall be pleased
if he goes to the shop of your master and is careful to do
his best; and so comfort him, because, if all goes well, I
have hopes of placing you both in a good position, if you
will be discreet. About that land which is beside that of
Mona <note place="foot"><p>That is, Dame Zanobia.</p></note> Zanobia, if Lodovico likes it, tell him to see about
it and let me know. I think, according to what is
rumoured here, the Pope will leave about the time of
Carnival.</p>

<p>"The first day of February, 1506.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo di Lodovico</hi><lb />
"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">di Buonarrota Simoni</hi>,<lb />
"Sculptor, in Bologna."</p>
</quote>

<p>Notwithstanding this warning, the silly old man, his
father, wrote a scolding letter to his son about the workmen.
Michael Angelo's humble reply was dated February 8,
1507.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. iv. p. 8 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Most Revered Father</hi>,&mdash;I have received a letter
from you to-day, from which I learn that you have been
talked to by Lapo and Lodovico. I am glad that you
<pb n="136" /><anchor id="Pg136" />should rebuke me, because I deserve to be rebuked as a
miserable sinner, as much as any one, perhaps more. But
you must know that I have not been guilty in this
affair for which you blame me now."
</p>
</quote>

<p>He goes on to explain his dealings with the rogue
Lapo. There is also trouble about a sword-hilt<note place="foot"><p>We should like to see it; we have nothing of Michael Angelo's
which can help us to imagine what this work was like.</p></note> Michael
Angelo had designed for Pietro Aldobrandini. However,
Aldobrandini objected that the blade was too short.
Michael Angelo affirmed that it was ordered exactly to the
measure sent, and bade his brother present it to Filippo
Strozzi as a compliment from the Buonarroti family; but
the stupid fellow bungled it in some way, for Michael
Angelo writes to say that he is sorry "he behaved so
scurvily towards Filippo in so trifling an affair."</p>

<p>Michael Angelo must have spent his spare time in
studying the bas-reliefs by Jacopo della Quercia upon the
façade of San Petronio, for he used many of the motives
in his next great work, the Sistine vault. When the wax
model of the statue of Pope Julius was ready, Michael
Angelo sent to Florence for the ordnance founder to the
Republic, Maestro dal Ponte, of Milan, to cast it for him.
This master's leave of absence was signed on May 15, 1507.
Just before the casting Michael Angelo wrote to
Buonarroto:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto di Lodovico Simoni</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence, at the
Shop of</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lorenzo Strozzi</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Wool Merchant, in Porta
Rossa, Florence</hi>.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I have received yours by the hand of
Master Bernardo, who has arrived; by it I hear all are
<pb n="137" /><anchor id="Pg137" />well except Giovansimone, who has not yet recovered. I
am very sorry, and it grieves me not to be able to help
him. But soon I hope to be with you, and I will do
something that will please him, and you others, too.
Therefore comfort him and tell him to be of good cheer.
Tell Lodovico also that about the middle of next month I
hope to cast my figure without fail; therefore, if he will
offer prayers, or anything else for its good success, let him
do so betimes, and say I beg this of him. I have no time
to write more. Things go well.</p>

<p>"The twenty-sixth day of May (1507).</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Bologna."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lx. p. 76 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>At last, on July 1, it is done, but done badly; and he
writes:&mdash;</p>

<p>To the same.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;We have cast my figure, and it has
come out so badly that I truly believe I shall have to do it
all again. I cannot write all the particulars, because I
have other things to think of. Enough that it has come
badly. Thanks be to God all the same, because I
believe everything is for the best. Before long I shall
know what I have to do and will write to you. Tell
Lodovico about it, and be of good cheer. And if it should
be that I have to do it all again, and that I am not able
to return to you, I will find means somehow to do what I
have promised in the best way I can.</p>

<p>"The first day of July.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Bologna."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxii. p. 78 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p><pb n="138" /><anchor id="Pg138" />He gives further details in his next letter:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;Understand how that we have cast my
figure. I have not had much luck in it; for Master Bernardino,
either by ignorance or misfortune, did not
sufficiently melt the bronze. How it happened would be
long to tell; it is enough that my figure has come out up
to the girdle; the rest of the stuff, that is to say the metal,
remained in the furnace; it was not melted; so that to get
it out I shall have the furnace taken to pieces, and that I
am doing now, and I will have it remade again this week.
Next week I will recast the upper part and finish filling the
mould, and I believe that this bad business will go very
well, but not without the greatest devotion, labour, and
expense. I would have believed that Master Bernardino
could have cast it without fire, so much faith had I in
him; all the same, it is not that he is not a good master
and that he did not work with a will. But he who fails,
fails. And he has failed enough to my loss and his own,
for he blames himself so much that he cannot lift his
eyes in Bologna. If you see Baccio d'Agnolo read him
this letter and ask him to tell San Gallo, at Rome, and
remember me to him and to Giovanni da Ricasoli, and to
Granaccio give my respects. I hope, if the thing goes
well, in from fifteen to twenty days to be through with it
and to return to you. If it should not go well, I should
perhaps have to do it again. I will tell you all. Let
me know how Giovansimone is.</p>

<p>"The sixth day of July.  (<hi rend="font-style: italic">No signature</hi>.)</p>

<p>"With this will be a letter to go to Rome for Giuliano
da San Gallo. Send it safely and as quickly as you can;
but if he should happen to be in Florence, give it to him."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxiii. p. 79 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p><pb n="139" /><anchor id="Pg139" />Again, to the same:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonorroto</hi>,&mdash;I hear by one of yours that you are
well and happy. It pleases me very much. My business
here, I hope, will turn out well after all, but as yet I know
nothing. We have recast the upper part which was wanting,
as I informed you, but have not been able to see how
it has come, for the sand is so hot that we cannot as yet
uncover it. By next week I shall know and will tell
you. Master Bernardino left here yesterday. When he
salutes you receive him kindly enough.</p>

<p>"The tenth day of July.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Bologna."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxiv. p. 80 (in the Archivio Buonarroto).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>To the same, later (July 18, 1501):&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;My affairs might have turned out much
better and also much worse; at any rate, all of it is there
as far as I can make out, for it is not yet all uncovered.
I estimate that it will take some months to chase, for it
has come out with a bad surface; all the same, we must
thank God! for, as I say, it might have been worse. If
anything is said to you by Salvestro del Pollaiolo<note place="foot"><p>Nephew of Antonio del Pollaiuolo.</p></note> or
others, tell them that I do not need any one, so that
no one will be sent here to be on my shoulders, because
I have spent so much that there hardly remains enough
for me to live on, let alone keeping others. About next
week I will let you know more when I have uncovered the
whole figure.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Bologna."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxv. p. 81 (in the Archivio Buonarroto).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p><pb n="140" /><anchor id="Pg140" />After several letters describing his labours, he writes,
ultimately, to the same:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I marvel you write to me so seldom.
I am sure you have much more time to write to me than I
to write to you, so let me hear often how things go. I
understand by your last how, with good reason, you wish
me to return soon. It made me anxious for several days;
therefore, when you write to me, write strongly and clearly
what the matter is so that I may understand it&mdash;and
enough. Know that I desire to return soon even more
than you desire it, for I pass my life here in the greatest
discomfort and with the hardest labour, doing nothing but
work day and night, and I have endured so much fatigue
and hardship that if I should have to go through it again,
I do not believe my life would hold out, for it has been an
enormous undertaking, and if it had been in any one else's
hands it would have come out very badly. But I believe
the prayers of some one have sustained me and kept me
in health, for all Bologna was of opinion that I should
never finish it after it was cast, and before also, when no
one would believe that I should ever cast it. Enough that
I have brought it to a good end, but I shall not quite have
finished it by the end of this month, as I hoped; but next
month, at any rate, it will be done, and I will return. So
be all of good cheer, for I will do as I promised whatever
happens. Comfort Lodovico and Giovansimone for me
and write to me how Giovansimone does. Mind and
learn to keep shop, so that you will know how to do it
when you need, which will be soon.</p>

<p>"The tenth day of November.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Bologna."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxxii. p. 88 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p><pb n="141" /><anchor id="Pg141" />He worked on until February, and wrote to the same:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;It is now a fortnight since I expected
to be with you, for I thought that directly my figure was
finished they would place it. And now these people are
dawdling and doing nothing; and I have orders from the
Pope not to leave until it is placed, so that it seems to me
I shall be prevented. I shall stay and look after it all this
week too; if there are no further orders I will come
away at all costs, without observing the command. With
this will be a letter to go to the Cardinal of Pavia, in
which I reply to him about it all, so that he cannot complain.
So put it in a cover and direct it to Giuliano da
San Gallo on my part, and desire him to deliver it with
his own hand.</p>

<p>"Di Bologna (the 18th day of February, 1508)."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. lxxv. p. 91 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>On February 21, 1508, the statue of Pope Julius II.
was hoisted on to its pedestal above the great central door
of San Petronio. Alas! this work which cost Michael
Angelo a year and three months of hard, unremitting
labour only existed for about twice that period. It was
destroyed by the worst enemy of art&mdash;war. The Papal
Legate fled from Bologna in 1511 and the Bentivogli again
entered the city. The people of their party dragged the
heavy bronze to the ground and broke it into pieces on
December 30. The broken fragments were sent to Alfonso
d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, who cast a huge cannon with the
metal, which the Italians, with their usual mocking spirit,
immediately called La Giulia. The Duke kept the head
only, and said he would not take its weight in gold for it; it
weighed six hundred pounds. This head has disappeared too;
<pb n="142" /><anchor id="Pg142" />there is no drawing, engraving, or any fragment to help us to
reconstruct in our minds this mighty bronze; only, perhaps,
we may imagine that we have an echo of this Pope by
Michael Angelo when we turn our eyes from the bare
front of San Petronio to the niche on the Palazzo
Comunale to the right of the square, where a bronze Pope,
Gregory XIII., stretches his hand to curse the iconoclastic
people. In the Piazza Dante, at Perugia, is the bronze
statue of Pope Julius III., by Vincenzio Dante, that makes
us think of the master, and in Rimini a mighty bronze
form stretches out his right hand with a threatening
gesture. He, too, is a Pope&mdash;Paul V.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image13" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image13.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE CREATION OF THE SUN AND MOON, AND OF THE TREES AND HERBS</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence)</p>
<figDesc>Image #13</figDesc>
</figure></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="143" /><anchor id="Pg143" /><head>CHAPTER VI</head>

<head type="sub">THE VAULT OF THE SISTINE CHAPEL</head>

<p>Michael Angelo's work in Bologna well over, he returned
to Florence upon March 18, 1508, and hired his
house at Borgo Pinti from the Operai del Duomo, probably
intending to proceed with the Twelve Apostles for that
church. Michael Angelo's father now emancipated his
son from parental control. The date of the document is
March 13; it was entered in the State Archives upon March
28. According to the law of Florence a son was not of
age until his father had executed this document. Michael
Angelo appears to have had the idea of settling in Florence
at this time, but "his Medusa," as he called the Pope,
commanded the presence of his artist in Rome as soon as
he heard that the work at Bologna was finished. Michael
Angelo obeyed at once this time. We have a good account
by his own hand of what happened when he arrived
in Rome, his famous letter to Fattucci, written sixteen
years later.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ser Giovan Francesco Fattucci</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Rome</hi>.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">From</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Florence</hi> (<hi rend="font-style: italic">January</hi> 1524).</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giovan Francesco</hi>,&mdash;You ask of me in your
letter how my affairs stood with Pope Julius. I tell you
that I estimate that I could demand payment and interest
<pb n="144" /><anchor id="Pg144" />on it, to receive money rather than give it. For when
he sent for me to Florence, I believe it was in the second
year of his Pontificate, I had begun to decorate the half of
the Sala del Consiglio of Florence, that is to paint it. I
was to have had three thousand ducats for it, and the
cartoon was already completed, as was well known to all
Florence, so that they seemed to me half earned. And of
the Twelve Apostles, which I had still to do for Santa Maria
del Fiore, one was sketched out, as may still be seen; and
I had carried thither the greater part of the marbles.
Pope Julius calling me away, I received nothing for either
undertaking. Afterwards, I being in Rome with the said
Pope Julius, he commissioned me to make his tomb,
into which was to go a thousand ducats' worth of marbles.
He paid me the money, and sent me to Carrara for them;
there I stayed eight months having them blocked out, and
brought them almost all to the piazza of St. Peter's; a part
remained at the Ripa. After I had paid the freightage of
these said marbles the money received for this work came
to an end. I furnished the house I had on the piazza of St.
Peter's with beds and furniture with my own money, on
my hopes of the tomb, and sent for workmen from
Florence (some of whom are still living), and paid them
with my own in advance. By this time Pope Julius had
changed his mind, and no longer wished to have it done.
I, not knowing this and going to him for money, was
chased from the room; and for this insult I immediately
left Rome, and everything I had in my house went to the
bad; and these marbles which I had bought lay on the
piazza of St. Peter's until the creation of Pope Leo; and
on every side things went wrong. Among other things
that I can prove, two pieces, of four braccia and a half
<pb n="145" /><anchor id="Pg145" />each, on the Ripa were stolen from me by Agostino Chigi,
which had cost me more than fifty gold ducats; and these
could be claimed for, because there are witnesses. But to
return to the marbles. From the time that I went for
them, and that I remained at Carrara, until I was driven
from the Palace, was more than a year, for which period I
never received anything, and I paid out many tens of
ducats.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image14" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image14.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>CREATION OF MAN</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of Messrs. Braun, Clement &amp; Co., in Dornach, Alsace</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #14</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>"Afterwards, the first time Pope Julius went to Bologna,
I was obliged to take my courage in both hands and
go there to beg his pardon; then he ordered me to
make his portrait in bronze, which was seated, about seven
braccia high. He asking me what it would cost, I said
I believed I could cast it for a thousand ducats, but that
it was not my art and that I could not promise. He
replied to me: 'Go to work and cast it until it come well,
and we will give you what will content you.' To be brief,
it was cast twice. At the end of the two years that I
stayed there I found myself four ducats and a half in
pocket; and during that time I never received anything
for all the expenses that I had, except the thousand ducats
which I had said that I could cast it for; these were paid
me in several installments by Messer Antonio Maria da
Legnia (<hi rend="font-style: italic">me</hi>), the Bolognese.</p>

<p>"Having hoisted the figure on to the façade of San
Petronio, and returned to Rome, Pope Julius did not yet
wish me to go on with the tomb, but set me to paint the
vault of Sisto, and we made an agreement for three thousand
ducats. The first design was for twelve apostles in the
lunettes, and for the rest certain compartments filled with
ornaments of the usual sort.</p>

<p>"After beginning the said work it seemed to me it would
<pb n="146" /><anchor id="Pg146" />be but a poor thing. He asked me why? I told him,
because they also were poor. Then he gave me a new
order to do what I would, and that he would satisfy me,
and that I was to paint down to the stories below. When
the vault was almost finished the Pope returned to
Bologna, where I went twice for money I needed, uselessly,
and lost all my time, until he returned to Rome. I
returned to Rome and set myself to work on the cartoons
for the said vault, that is, for the ends and sides of the
said Chapel of Sisto, hoping to have money to finish the
work. I never could obtain anything; and complaining
one day to Messer Bernardo da Bibbiena and Attalante
how that I was unable to stay any longer in Rome, but
that I must go away, with the help of God, Messer
Bernardo said to Attalante that he must remember that
he was to give me money in any case, and he had two
thousand ducats of the Chamber given to me, which are
the moneys, with that first thousand for marbles, that
they put to the account of the tomb; and I estimate that
I should have more for the time lost and the work done.
And of the said moneys, Messer Bernardo and Attalante
having obtained it for me, I gave to the one a hundred
ducats, to the other fifty.</p>

<p>"Then came the death of Pope Julius, and in the first
years of Leo, Aginensis, wishing to enlarge the tomb, that
is, to make a greater work than the design I had at first
prepared, we made a contract, and I not wishing the
said three thousand ducats I had received to be put
to the account of the tomb, and showing that I ought
to have much more, Aginensis said to me that I was a
swindler."<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. ccclxxxiii. p. 426 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<pb n="147" /><anchor id="Pg147" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image15" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image15.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>CREATION OF MAN</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">DETAIL, SISTINE CHAPEL</p>
<figDesc>Image #15</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The preliminary works for the vault of the Sistine
Chapel were carried on without delay, and there is a note
in Michael Angelo's hand, saying: "I record how on
this day, the tenth of May, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eight, I, Michael Angelo, Sculptor, have
received from the Holiness of our Lord Pope Julius II.
five hundred ducats of the Camera, the which were paid
me by Messer Carlino, chamberlain, and Messer Carlo degli
Albizzi, on account of the painting of the vault of the
Chapel of Pope Sisto, on which I begin to work this day,
under the conditions and contracts set forth in a document
written by his Most Reverend Lordship of Pavia,
and signed by my hand. For the painter assistants who
are to come from Florence, who will be five in number,
twenty gold ducats of the Camera a-piece, on this condition,
that is to say, that when they are here and are working
in accord with me, the said twenty ducats shall be
reckoned to each man's salary; the said salary to begin
upon the day they leave Florence to come here. And if
they do not agree with me, half the said money shall be
paid them for their travelling expenses and for their
time."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. c. (Ricordi) p. 563 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>

<p>From this important record we learn that Michael
Angelo, who still calls himself "sculptor," intends to
engage five painter assistants, and very wisely arranges
terms by which he can send them away if he does not get
on with them, and also that he began to work upon May
10, 1508. This must not be taken to mean that he began
to paint, but only to prepare the vault by carefully pointing
the bricks and covering it with rough cast plaster
ready for the fine coat called intonaca, in this case made
<pb n="148" /><anchor id="Pg148" />of marble dust and Roman lime, prepared each day and
plastered on the wall in patches sufficient for one day's work
only. In true fresco painting the colour is put on the
plaster only whilst it is still wet. Michael Angelo must also
have prepared a general scheme to scale from his small
design, approved by the Pope, and set it off with very careful
measurements on the surface of the rough cast, at least as
to the architectural framework. The cartoons for the
figure-subjects and details he may have left until they
were needed. He considerably altered the scale of the
figures in his stories as he proceeded with the work; this
alteration in scale is not only observable in the central
subjects or pictures of the vault, but also in the decorative
figures on the framework, called Athletes; those at the
end, near the stories of Noah and the Flood, and where
Michael Angelo began to work, are at least a head
smaller than those at the other end of the chapel over the
altar, where the stories relate to the Creation. This can
be seen even in a photographic reproduction. Although
the development of the great scheme was so much upon
the traditional lines of Italian art, yet the details of
arrangement and placing must have fully occupied the
artist for some months. He cannot have begun actually
to paint on the vault until late autumn, at least, not any
of the work we see now, for his assistants did not
arrive from Florence until August, and he had to experiment
with their work, and find it wanting, before he
dismissed them, destroyed their work, and began alone.
All the work of the part of the vault executed first is by
Michael Angelo's own hand, as far as can be judged from
the floor of the chapel, or from the cornice level with the
windows. The following receipts for the plaster, or for
<pb n="149" /><anchor id="Pg149" />rough-coating the vault, show that painting cannot have
begun so early as has been assumed:<note place="foot"><p>In the Buonarroti Archives; quoted by Heath Wilson, p. 123.</p></note></p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image16" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image16.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE CREATION OF EVE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME</p>
<figDesc>Image #16</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"In the name of God, the 11th day of May, 1508.</p>

<p>"I, Piero di Jacopo Roselli, Master Mason, have this
day received, the 11th of May as above said, from Michael
Angelo Bonaroti, Sculptor, ten ducats in gold, full weight,
on account of 'Scialbatura' on the vault of Pope Sixtus,
and for rough plastering in his chapel, and doing that which
was needful by order of Pope Julius; and in faith of the
truth I have done this with my own hand, this day above
said. Ducats 10 of gold, full weight."</p>
</quote>

<p>This payment was made by Michael Angelo. The second
receipt of Rosselli for fifteen ducats was made out on
May 24, to Francesco Granacci, so he was already in Rome,
helping his friend. The next payment of ten ducats was
also made by Granacci on June 3, and another on June 10.
On July 17 Michael Angelo himself paid the mason; so
Granacci had gone to Florence by then to hire the other
assistants. On July 27 Michael Angelo paid Rosselli
thirty golden ducats, full weight, for rough plastering and
other details. The amount paid, and the time taken, go
to prove that the whole vault was plastered. Granacci<note place="foot"><p>.<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid.</hi> p. 124.</p></note>
wrote from Florence about the assistants. Heath Wilson
gives a literal translation of his rather bewildering letter.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Very Dear Friend</hi>,&mdash;I recommend myself and wish
you infinite health. This is to your Excellency, as to-day
I met Raffaelino, the painter, and gathered from him in
fine that if you have need of him he will come at your
<pb n="150" /><anchor id="Pg150" />bidding, should you be pleased to pay him the salary
which he has received from the Master Pietro Matteo
d'Amelia, who, he says, gave him ten ducats a month.
Ever faithful to your Excellency, I give the advice as
from myself. If you have need to employ him, offer
him your amount of salary; he is ready to do what you
may command as to work. He is a good master and
honest. And if for me there is anything, advise me, for I
am always here to do for you those things which are
useful and honourable. If I can do one thing more than
another let me know; I will do it with love and solicitude.
Nothing more. Christ have you in his keeping. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Bene
Valeti</hi>.</p>

<p>"This day, 22nd of July, 1508.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yours</hi>,<lb />
"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Francesco Granacci</hi>.</p>

<p>"If you can employ me as above is said, I shall be
willing to be with you. Nothing more.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Giovanni Michi</hi>,<lb />
"San Lorenzo, Florence<lb />
"(Faithful service and honest man).</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Directed to the Excellent Master<lb />
Michael Angelo, Florence, at<lb />
St. Peter's, Sculptor, Rome.</p>

<p>"Given from the Bank of Baldassare in Campo di
Fiore."</p>
</quote>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image17" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image17.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE EXPULSION</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of Messrs. Braun, Clément &amp; Co., in. Dornach, Alsace</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #17</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Neither Raffaellino del Garbo nor Giovanni Michi
were employed, but the next letter of Granacci, dated
July 24, 1508, mentions Giuliano Buggiardini and Jacopo
L'Indaco, who were both tried. Vasari informs us that
<pb n="151" /><anchor id="Pg151" />Granacci, Jacopo di Sandro, and the elder Indaco, Agnolo
di Donnino, and Aristotile da Sangallo also accepted work.
We have another proof that the actual fresco painting did
not begin at this period, in a document preserved in the
National Archives at Florence. Heath Wilson obtained
legal opinion that Michael Angelo must have been in
Florence in person when this deed was executed. It runs:
"In the year of our Lord, 1508, on the 11th day of
August, Michael Angelo, the son of Ludovico Lionardo di
Buonarroto, cancelled his lawful claim upon the estate of
his uncle Francis by a deed drawn up by Ser Giovanni di
Guasparre da Montevarchi, Florentine notary, on the 27th
of the month of July, 1508." Another instance of Michael
Angelo's generosity to his family. If Michael Angelo at
once proceeded to Rome, he and his assistants may have
begun work towards the end of August. During all this
period we must notice how troubled he was by the affairs
of his family and his household arrangements. Michael
Angelo, while living like a poor man in Rome, sent money
to, and purchased land for, his family in Florence, and
helped to establish Buonarroto in business, but they were
never satisfied, and his letters to his father and Giovan
Simone show how his mind was troubled. There is a
letter in the British Museum that belongs to this summer
of 1508.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Most Reverend Father</hi>,&mdash;I have learnt by your
last how things go with you, and how Giovan Simone
behaves himself. I have not had worse news for ten years
than on the evening when I read your letter, for I thought
that I had arranged their affairs so that they had reason
to hope they would make a good shop with my aid. Now,
<pb n="152" /><anchor id="Pg152" />I see, they do the contrary, especially Giovan Simone.
From this I know that it is profitless to try and do him
good. Had it been possible on the day when I received
your letter I should have mounted on horseback and by
this time should have settled everything; but not being
able to do so, I write him such a letter as appears to me
to be necessary, and if from now he does not change his
nature, or if ever he takes from the home so much as a
stick, or does anything to displease you, I pray you to let me
know, because I will obtain leave from the Pope to come
to you, when I shall show him his error. I wish you to
be certain that all the labours which I have continually
endured have been more for your sake than for my own,
and the property which I have bought I have bought
that it may be yours whilst you live. Had it not been for
you I should not have bought it. Therefore, if it please
you to let this house or the farm, do so; and with
that income and with what I shall give you you will live
like a gentleman. Were it not that the summer were
coming on I would say come and live with me here, but it
is not the season, for here in summer you would not live
long. It has occurred to me to take from him (Giovan
Simone) the money which he has in the shop, and to give
it to Gismondo, so that he and Buonarroto may get on
together as well as they can ... and if you let these said
houses and the farm of the Pazolatica, and with that
income and with the help that I will give you besides, you
will take refuge in some place where you will be comfortable,
and you will be able to keep some one to serve
you either in Florence or outside Florence, and leave that
good-for-nothing ... I pray you to consider yourself,
and in all things whatever you wish to do&mdash;that is, for
<pb n="153" /><anchor id="Pg153" />yourself in all you desire&mdash;I will aid you all I know and
can. Let me hear about Cassandra's affairs. I am advised
not to go to law about it here. I am told that I shall
spend here three times as much as there; and this
is certain, for a grosso goes further there than two carlini
here. Besides, I have no friend here to trust to, and I
could not attend to such things. It seems to me, when
you desire to attend to it, that you should go by the
usual way, as reason demands, and you must defend yourself
as well as you are able and know how; and for the
money that is necessary to spend I will not fail as long as
I have any. Have as little fear as you can, for it is not a
case of life and death. No more. Let me know, as I told
you above.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"From <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. vii. p. 13 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image18" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image18.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE DELUGE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">A DETAIL, SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a photograph by Sig. D. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #18</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Truly his family did all they could to disturb his
mind during this important period of the development of
his greatest work. The mind that wrote the following
letter to Giovan Simone cannot have been in a good state
for work; but as he never lets a thought about his art
appear in his letters, so, no doubt, when once the mood of
work was upon him, all other thoughts were left without
the workshop door:</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rome</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">July</hi> 1508.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Giovan Simone</hi>,&mdash;It is said that when one does good
to a good man it makes him become better, but a bad
man becomes worse. I have tried now many years with
words and deeds of kindness to bring you to live honestly
and in peace with your father and the rest of us. You
grow continually worse. I do not say that you are a bad
<pb n="154" /><anchor id="Pg154" />man, but you are of such sort that you have ceased to
please me or anybody. I could read you a long lesson on
your ways of living, but they would be idle words, like all
the rest that I have wasted on you. To cut the matter
short, I will tell you for a certain truth that you have
nothing in the world. What you spend and your house-room
I give you, and have given you these many years,
for the love of God, believing you to be my brother like
the rest. Now, I am sure that you are not my brother,
else you would not threaten my father. Nay, you are a
beast; and as a beast I mean to treat you. Know that he
who sees his father threatened or roughly handled is
bound to risk his own life in this cause. Enough, I
tell you that you have nothing in the world; and if I
hear the least thing about your goings on, I will come
post-haste and show you your error, and teach you to
waste your substance and set fire to houses and farms you
have not earned. Indeed, you are not where you think
yourself to be. If I come, I will open your eyes to what
will make you weep hot tears, and let you know on what
false grounds you found your pride.</p>

<p>"I have something else to say to you which I have not
said before. If you will endeavour to live rightly, and to
honour and revere your father, I will help you like the
rest, and make you able shortly to open a good shop.
If you do not do so, I shall come and settle your affairs
in such a fashion that you will know what you are better
than you ever did, and will understand what you have
in the world, and it will be seen in every place where
you may go. No more. What I lack in words I will
supply with deeds.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><pb n="155" /><anchor id="Pg155" /><anchor id="image19" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image19.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ATHLETE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #19</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>"I cannot refrain from adding two lines. It is this:
I have gone these twelve years past, drudging about
through all Italy, borne every shame, suffered every hardship,
worn my body in every toil, put my life into a
thousand dangers, solely to help the fortunes of my
house, and now that I have begun to raise it up a little,
you alone choose to destroy and ruin in one hour all that
I have done in so many years, and with such labours. By
Christ's body this shall not be! for I am the man to confound
ten thousand such as you whenever it be needed.
Be wise in time then, and do not try one who has other
things to vex him."</p>
</quote>

<p>So with hindrances enough, private and public, we
must imagine the great artist climbing his scaffolding to
the vault of the Pope's chapel, followed by his assistants,
and setting them their task, transferring his full-size outline
cartoons, prepared from the general designs, to the
roof. We may fancy L'Indaco, Buggiardini, and the rest,
staring with amazement at the huge figures and the great
flowing lines before them, and trying to fit their dry
manner of painting to the new grandeur of design. It
could but end in one way. The clause prepared beforehand
by Michael Angelo in the contracts came into effect,
and they had to be sent away, with plenty of grumbling
on their part, no doubt. Michael Angelo was too exacting
in the perfection of his taste to allow any work short
of the absolute ideal he had imagined. Unlike Raphael,
who was working in the neighbouring stanze, and who was
contented to pass, and some would have us believe to
execute, ill-turned foreshortenings and false drawing, so
long as his general effect was preserved and the work done
<pb n="156" /><anchor id="Pg156" />in reasonable time. Perhaps his gentle and sunlike genius
could not bear to use harsh words and shut the door
against the mediocre men with whom he was surrounded.
Michael Angelo could brook no imperfection of whatever
kind, so that he destroyed all that his assistants had done
and shut himself up alone in the chapel. He was the only
man who could do the work to his satisfaction; so he did it,
alone and unaided, as to the actual painting, and produced
a work unequalled in perfection since Phidias worked in
Athens.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>The dismissal of his assistants appears to have begun
about the New Year 1509. It is hinted at in this
letter:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dearest Father</hi>,&mdash;I have to-day received one of yours.
When I read it I was sufficiently displeased. I doubt that
you are more timid and fearful than you need be. I should
like you to tell me what you imagine they can do to you,
that is, if it should come to the worst. I have no more to
say. It grieves me that you should be in such fear, so I
comfort you by advising you to be well prepared against
their power, with good advice, and then think no more
about it; for if they took away all you have in the world
you should not lack means to be comfortable as long as I
was there. Therefore be of good cheer. I am still in a
great quandary, for it is now a year since I received a
groat from the Pope, and I do not ask for it, for my work
does not go forward in such a fashion as to deserve it, as
it seems to me. And this is because of the difficulty of
the work, and also that it is not my profession. And so
I lose my time fruitlessly. God help me. If you are in
<pb n="157" /><anchor id="Pg157" />need of money go to the Spedalingo<note place="foot"><p>The head of the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence, where
Michael Angelo banked his money.</p></note> and make him give
you anything up to fifteen ducats, and let me know what
remains. Jacopo,<note place="foot"><p>L'Indaco.</p></note> the painter whom I brought here, has
just left, and as he has been grumbling here about my
doings, I expect he will grumble there also. Turn a deaf
ear to him. It is enough. For he is a thousand times in
the wrong. I have good reason to complain of him.
Take no notice of him. Tell Buonarroto that I will reply
to him another time.</p>

<p>"The day twenty 7 of January.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. x. p. 17 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image20" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image20.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ATHLETE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #20</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Buggiardini appears to have fared better than L'Indaco.
He painted a portrait of Michael Angelo with a towel
tied round his head like a turban, now in the Casa Buonarroti,
at Florence. From the age of the sitter it appears
to belong to this period; the towel may have been used to
protect the hair and head of the artist from falling colour
as he painted the roof above him. It is an energetic
head, with jet black hair and sallow complexion, with
many lines and wrinkles for so young a face, determined,
sad, and scornful in expression; a slight weakness and
affectation may be due to the personality of the painter.
Buggiardini also executed a painting from the cartoon of
the master, the Madonna and Child with Angels, number
809, of the National Gallery. The beauty and grandeur
of the lines of this design are far above the imagination
of any one except Michael Angelo, but the details of the
<pb n="158" /><anchor id="Pg158" />execution of the hands and the feet are inferior to any
authentic work of his. The hatchings in the shadows,
especially of the draperies, are made up of short and
feeble lines, and do not express the form of the folds at
all in the same way as we are accustomed to see Michael
Angelo express them, even in his earlier drawings, the
copies from Giotto and the primitives. The form of the
mouths, and the expression and shape of the heads, especially
in the second angel on the right, are similar to
the work of Buggiardini as seen in Florence, Milan, and
the Cathedral of Pisa. Buggiardini is the only one of
the assistants who seems to have reaped any benefit,
beyond their wages, from the work they did for the great
master. This trouble with his assistants was not the only
difficulty that Michael Angelo had to contend with in the
execution of his work. Vasari says that he shut himself
alone in the chapel, without any one to help him even in
the grinding of his colours; but, as he adds, that he took
great precautions to prevent the workmen informing the
public as to what he was doing, we must assume that
Vasari was repeating a fable that had grown up about the
marvellous work forty years after it was executed, much
as we might at this day repeat stories of the making of
the Wellington Monument by Alfred Stevens. The carpenters
and plasterers Michael Angelo employed would
soon learn to perform the more mechanical part of his
work, such as laying the intonaco, pricking the cartoons,
and grinding colours, and as they could not have inserted
into the work any tradition contrary to the new manner of
the artist, would be preferred by him to second-rate artist
assistants; no doubt, too, the boy he employed in household
work would be made to help. The trouble he had
<pb n="159" /><anchor id="Pg159" />in his household arrangements before the time of his trusted
servant, Urbino, may be illustrated by a letter relating to
the boy he got from Florence about this time. He never
would have a woman to work for him in any way.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image21" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image21.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ATHLETE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #21</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lodovico di Buonarrota Simoni</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rome</hi> (<hi rend="font-style: italic">January</hi> 1510).</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Most Revered Father</hi>,&mdash;I answered you about the
business of Bernardino, as I wished first to settle the affairs
of my household as you know, and so I now reply to you.
I sent first for him because I was promised that within a
few days he would be ready and that I might get to work.
Afterwards I saw that it would be a long business; in the
meantime I am seeking another suitable one to get out of
it. I won't have any work done until I am ready, but tell
him how the matter stands. About the boy who came,
that rascal of a muleteer did me out of a ducat. He took
an oath that he had agreed for two broad golden ducats,
and all the lads who come here with the muleteers do not
give more than ten carlinos. I was more angry than if I
had lost twenty-five ducats, because I see it is the fault of
the father, who wanted to send him on muleback in
state. Oh! I had never such good fortune! not I.
Although the father declared, and the son likewise, that
he would do anything, attend to the mule, and sleep on
the ground if necessary; and now I have to look after
him. Did I need any more bothers than I have had
since my return? Here I have my boy, whom I left
here, ill since the day I returned until now. He is now
better it is true, but he has been between life and death,
given up by the doctors, so that for about a month I have
not been in bed, let alone many others. Now I have this
<pb n="160" /><anchor id="Pg160" />nuisance of a boy, who says, and says again, that he does
not want to lose time, that he must learn. And he told
me that he would be satisfied with two or three hours a
day. Now all day is not enough, so that he will be drawing
all night also. These are counsels of the father. If
I say anything he would declare that I did not wish him
to learn. I want some one to mind the house, and if he
did not feel like doing it they should not have put me
to this expense. But they are no good, no good at all,
and are working for their own ends; but enough. I beg
you to have him taken away from before me, for he annoys
me so much that I cannot stand him any longer. The
muleteer has had so much money that he can very well
take him back again; he is a friend of his father's. Tell
the father to send for him. I'll not give him another
farthing, for I have no money, I will have patience until
he sends for him, and if he is not sent for I will turn him
out, for I have done so already, on the second day after his
arrival and other times as well, and he won't believe it.</p>

<p>"For the business of the shop I will send you a hundred
ducats next Saturday. With this, if you see that they are
diligent and do well, give it to them and make me their
creditor, as I was to Buonarroto when he went away. If
they are not diligent, and do badly, place it to my account
at Santa Maria Nuova. It is not yet time to buy.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome.</p>

<p>"If you are speaking to the father of the boy, put
the matter nicely, mannerly; that he is a good lad, but
too genteel, and that he is not fit for my work, and that
he must send for him."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere xvii. p. 27 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<pb n="161" /><anchor id="Pg161" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image22" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image22.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ATHLETE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #22</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The more gentle tone of the postscript is very characteristic.
Outwardly he would be rough, consumed with
anger and indignation; but inwardly his nature was kindly
to a degree to those he had about him.</p>

<p>Condivi tells us of the delay in the works in the
Sistine due to the mould on the surface of the fresco, and
of the haste of Julius. The progress was fast enough, one
would have thought, even for that exacting Pontiff; for
although the whole work consists, on counting heads, of
some three hundred and ninety-four figures, the majority
ten feet high; the prophets and sibyls, twelve in number,
would be eighteen feet high if they stood up; yet by the
following letters to his brother Buonarroto, of October
1509, we know he had finished the first half, consisting probably
of some two hundred figures, even then; or assuming
that he began to paint when the assistants were dismissed
in January 1509, he worked at the rate of about a figure a
day.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto di Lodovico di Buonarrota</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-style: italic">From</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rome</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the 17th of October, 1509.</hi></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I got the bread: it is good, but it
is not good enough to make a trade of, for there would
be little gain. I gave the knave five carlini, and he
would hardly hand it over. I learn by your last how
Lorenzo<note place="foot"><p>Lorenzo Strozzi, to whose wool-shop Buonarroto went.</p></note> will pass this way, and how I am to give him
a good reception. It appears you do not know how I am
situated here, all the same I excuse you. What I can do,
I will. About Gismondo and how he intends to come
here to advance his business, tell him from me not to have
any designs on me, not because I do not love him as a
<pb n="162" /><anchor id="Pg162" />brother, but because I am unable to help him in anything.
I am obliged to love myself more than others, and I have
not enough for my own needs. I live here in great distress
and with the greatest fatigue of body, and have not a
friend of any sort, and do not want one, and have not
even enough time to eat necessary food; therefore, do not
annoy me any more, for I cannot bear another ounce.</p>

<p>For the shop I encourage you to be careful. It pleases
me to hear that Giovanni Simone begins to do well.
Endeavour to advance a little, or, at least, maintain what
you have got, so that you will know how to manage larger
affairs afterwards; for I have a hope, when I return to you,
that you will be men enough to manage for yourselves.
Tell Lodovico that I have not replied to him because I had
not the time, and not to wonder if I do not write.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, Sculptor, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. lxxx. p. 97 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>To the same.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-style: italic">From</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rome</hi> (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Oct. 1509</hi>).</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I hear by your last how that all are
well, and how Lodovico has another office. It all pleases
me, and I encourage him to accept it if it will allow him
to return when necessary to his post in Florence. I am
here just as usual, and shall have finished my painting by
the end of next week, that is, the part of it I began;
and when I have uncovered it I believe I shall receive my
money, and I will endeavour again to get leave to come to
you for a month. I do not know whether it will be,
but I need it for I am not very well. I have no time
to write more. I will tell you what happens.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, Sculptor, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. lxxxi. p. 98 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<pb n="163" /><anchor id="Pg163" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image23" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image23.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE DELPHIC SIBYL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a photograph by Sig. D. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #23</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The work was exposed to view upon November 1,
1509. So at the longest possible estimate of time
from May 10, 1508, to November 1, 1509, Michael
Angelo took four hundred and sixty-two working days
to paint it. The more probable, in fact, almost certain
estimate of the time occupied in painting the fresco,
as we now see it, is from the time his assistants left
him, about New Year's Day 1509, to November 1 in
the same year, or two hundred and thirty-four working
days. As the plaster could only be painted on
whilst wet, we can tell, by the marks of the divisions
between the separate days' plasterings, how many
days the larger individual figures took. One of the
largest and most prominent, as well as one of the finest
and most finished, the Adam in the Creation of Man,
was painted in three sittings only. The lines of the
junctions of the plaster may be seen in a photograph;
one is along the collar bone, and one across the junction
of the body and the thighs. There is also a division
all round the figure, an inch or so from the outline,
so we know that the beautiful and highly finished head
and neck were painted in one day; the stupendous torso
and arms in another; and the huge legs, finished in
every detail, in a third. Such power of work and of
finish is utterly inconceivable to any artist of to-day.
Some will even excuse the imperfection of the study of
a head by saying that they had only three or four
sittings.</p>

<p>Condivi asserts, and Vasari follows him, that the part
uncovered in November 1509, was the first half of the
whole vault, beginning at the large door of entrance and
ending in the middle. But Albertini states in his
<pb n="164" /><anchor id="Pg164" /><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mirabilia Urbis</hi><note place="foot"><p>Albertini, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Mirabilia Urbis</hi>, quoted by Grimm vol. i. p. 523. Albertini's
words are <hi rend="font-style: italic">pars testudinea superior</hi>.</p></note> that the upper portion of the whole
vaulted roof had been uncovered when he saw it in 1509,
and this statement is corroborated by the work itself.
There is a distinct enlargement of the style from the Sin
of the Sons of Ham through the series of the Creation
and the Athletes to the Prophets and Sibyls, and again
from the first of these, near the large door, to those near
the altar wall. So it may have been the complete work
on the flat part of the vault that was shown to the world,
including the story of the Creation and Fall of Man;
and it was not, therefore, so very unreasonable of
Bramante to propose that Raphael should continue the
work, for he probably did not know of Michael Angelo's
intention of commemorating the promise of the Redeemer
by his prophets and sibyls upon the curved surface of
the vaulting. Michael Angelo was naturally indignant at
his action, but Julius, who probably was the only man
who knew Michael Angelo's scheme, commanded him to
complete his work.</p>

<p>We gather from a letter to his father that the
scaffolding for completing the painting of the vault was
not put up on September 7, 1510.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image24" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image24.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PROPHET JOEL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #24</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lodovico di Buonarrota Simoni</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-style: italic">From</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rome</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">September 7, 1510.</hi></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dearest Father</hi>,&mdash;I have received your last, and
hear with the greatest anxiety that Buonarroto is ill;
therefore, as soon as you see this, go to the Spedalingo<note place="foot"><p>Director of the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, where Michael
Angelo banked his money.</p></note>
<pb n="165" /><anchor id="Pg165" />and make him give you fifty or an hundred ducats; you
may need them. Arrange that all things necessary be
provided in good time, and that there be no lack of
money. Let me tell you how that I am waiting to
receive from the Pope five hundred ducats, well earned,
and he should give me as much again to put up the
scaffolding and go on with the other part of my work.
And he has gone from here without leaving me any orders.
I have written him a letter. I do not know what will
follow. I should have come to you immediately on the
receipt of your last, but if I left without permission I
doubt the Pope would be angry, and I should lose all
that I ought to have. Nevertheless, let me know
immediately if Buonarroto should still be very bad,
because if you think I ought to come I will ride post
and be with you in two days, for men are worth more
than money. Let me know at once, for I am very anxious.</p>

<p>"On the 7th day of September.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, Sculptor, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. xxi. p. 31 (in the British Museum).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>The following note tells of the end of the work:</p>

<p>"I have finished the Chapel which I painted. The
Pope is very well satisfied, but other things do not happen
as I wished. Lay blame on the times, which are unfavourable
to art." It is a note by Michael Angelo in the
Buonarroto manuscripts of the British Museum, but undated.
It is probably of October 1512, and marks the
close of this period of enormous work. The decoration
of the Sistine Chapel now consisted, firstly, on the flat
of the vault, of Michael Angelo's history of the Creation
and the Fall of Man, of the Punishment of the Flood,
<pb n="166" /><anchor id="Pg166" />and the Second Entry of Sin into the World; secondly,
on the pendentives, of the Prophets and Sibyls proclaiming
the coming of a Redeemer; and thirdly, of the Ancestors of
Christ, filling the arches of the windows and the arches on
the two end walls. Those on the altar wall are now covered
by angels bearing the instruments of the Passion of Christ,
parts of the great fresco of the Last Judgment, finished
by Michael Angelo thirty years afterwards. At Oxford
there are two drawings after these two destroyed frescoes
of the Ancestors of Christ series. Fourthly, at the four
corners the four great Deliverances of the Chosen People,
emblems of the Redemption; fifthly, below, between the
windows, a row of the figures of the Popes by Sandro Botticelli
and others; these are still in existence, except the
three that were on the wall of the high altar, now occupied
by the Last Judgment. They were the earliest of the
Popes, St. Peter probably in the centre. Lastly, below
again, the great series of frescoes of the History of Christ
and the History of Moses by Sandro Botticelli, Domenico del
Ghirlandaio, Cosimo Rosselli, Pietro Perugino, Bernardino
Pintoricchio, Luca Signorelli, and Bartolomeo della Gatta.
This splendid series forms a worthy predella to the epic work
of Michael Angelo above; that they are worthy the one
of the other is the highest compliment that can be paid
to either. These stories well repay prolonged study, and
help to keep our mind fresh to enjoy the idea of the advance
Michael Angelo made in the art of painting. It is very
instructive to compare his work with these frescoes of men
who were almost his contemporaries. Above the altar three
of this series were destroyed to make way for the Last
Judgment; they were all three by Perugino, and represented
the Assumption of the Virgin in the centre, the Nativity
<pb n="167" /><anchor id="Pg167" />on the right, and the finding of Moses on the left. At
the opposite end, over the great door, were two pictures
by Domenico del Ghirlandaio, representing the Resurrection
of Christ, and Michael contending with Satan for the
Body of Moses, completing the series of the lives of the
Redeemer and of his prototype in the Old Testament:
Moses, the Deliverer. These last two works were destroyed
for the ridiculous caricatures of Arrigo Fiammingo and
Mattei da Lecce. Ultimately the Tapestry woven after
the cartoons by Raphael, now at South Kensington Museum,
completed the cycle of decoration down to the ground
level.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image25" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image25.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PROPHET EZEKIEL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #25</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>When Pope Julius prevented Michael Angelo from
going on with his beloved project of the Tomb and made
him paint the vault, the master set to work to produce a
similar conception to the Tomb in a painted form. The
vault became a great temple of painted marble and
painted sculptures raised in mid-air above the walls of the
chapel. The cornices and pilasters are of simple Renaissance
architecture, the only ornaments he allowed himself
to use being similar to those he would have used as a
sculptor. Acorns, the family device of the della Rovere,
rams' skulls, and scallop shells, and the one theme of
decoration that Michael Angelo always delighted in&mdash;the
human figure. The Prophets and Sibyls took the positions
occupied by the principal figures designed for the Tomb,
like the great statue of Moses. The Athletes at the corner
of the ribs of the roof were in place of the bound captives,
two of which are now in the Louvre, and the nine
histories of the Creation and the Flood fill the panels like
the bronze reliefs of the Tomb. The detail and completeness
of this fresco are the best refutation of the
<pb n="168" /><anchor id="Pg168" />frequent criticism that Michael Angelo did not finish his
work. The fact is, that he finished more than any one.
Had Michael Angelo done no work but this vault of the
Sistine Chapel, it would have represented an output equal
in quantity alone to that of the most prolific of his brother
Italian artists. It is veritably a large picture-gallery of
his works in itself. An idea of its numerical magnitude
may be got by dividing it up into its component units and
making an inventory of them. The vault itself, according
to Heath Wilson, is one hundred and thirty-one feet six
inches long, by forty-five feet two and a half inches wide
at the large door end, and forty-three feet two and a half
inches at the altar end, an area of nearly six thousand
square feet, which apparently does not represent the
arch measurement but only the plane covered by the arch,
nor does it take account of the triangular and semicircular
spaces above the windows. This vast surface is divided
into:&mdash;</p>

<p>Four large pictures stretching over more than one-third
of the width of the roof, and containing from five to more
than forty-five figures, some of them twelve feet in height.</p>

<p>Five pictures, half the size of the last, with from one
to eight figures in each.</p>

<p>Twenty colossal nude figures of Athletes.</p>

<p>Ten circular medallions.</p>

<p>Seven large figures of Prophets.</p>

<p>Five large figures of Sibyls; these Prophets and Sibyls
would be eighteen feet high if they stood upright, and
most of them have secondary figures of angel boys between
them, twenty-three in all.</p>

<p>Twenty-four decorative pilasters of two children each,
in monochrome.</p>

<pb n="169" /><anchor id="Pg169" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image26" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image26.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PROPHET DANIEL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #26</figDesc>
</figure></p>


<p>Four large triangular compositions representing the
Redemptions of Israel, and containing from five to twenty-two
colossal figures.</p>

<p>Eight triangular spaces above the windows, representing
the Ancestors of Christ, containing from two to four
colossal figures.</p>

<p>Twenty-four groups in the semicircular spaces above
the windows, also of the Ancestors of Christ, of from one
to four colossal figures.</p>

<p>Ten large figures of children forming brackets under
the figures of Prophets and Sibyls, at the springing of the
arches between the windows.</p>

<p>Twenty-four bronze-coloured colossal figures filling up
the spaces in the architectural framework.</p>

<p>Thus, the vault may be regarded as a gallery of one
hundred and forty-five separate pictures by Michael Angelo.
There is one reservation, and that is, that the twenty-four
groups of two children forming pilasters are in pairs, of the
same outline but reversed; as they are differently lighted
they may still be taken as different pictures. These pilasters
form the sides of the thrones of the Prophets and Sibyls,
and repeating them in reversed outline on either side of
the same throne has a very valuable decorative effect, well
known to the old Italian workmen, who frequently repeated
the forms of their fruit and flower decorations in this
manner, by the expedient of reversing the paper-pricking
from one and the same cartoon. It is interesting to find
Michael Angelo resorting to this simple trick to get the
effect of balance in figure decoration. The light and shade
of the reversed figures follow the general scheme of the
illumination, so that the figures traced from the same
cartoons look very dissimilar when painted, but if the
<pb n="170" /><anchor id="Pg170" />outlines are traced from a photograph, and reversed on the
corresponding figures, they will be seen to coincide. It
seems impossible to explain the exactness in any other
way, a few measurements on the vault itself would make
it certain. Probably the same method was employed in
transferring the twenty-four bronze-coloured decorative
figures also.</p>

<p>The historical sequence of the events in the nine pictures
on the central space of the vault represents the Story of the
Creation, the Fall, the Flood, and the second entry of Sin into
the world, demonstrating the need for a scheme of Salvation,
promised by the Prophets and Sibyls in the second part of
the decoration. The series represented is an old invention,
and all the scenes may be found in Byzantine and early
Italian works; but the new treatment gives them a character
of grandeur only equalled by the Old Testament narrative
which they illustrate. All the human figures and most of
the angels appear to be dominated by an idea of impending
doom, but they nobly act their part in a fateful present,
although they know that the future cannot be changed
by any effort of theirs, however noble it may be. They
are all fatalists, but all noble in their pessimism; they
reflect the mind of the artist. The individual motives of
the figures, their grouping and their action, are frequently
taken from earlier art, especially sculpture, and they show
how carefully and reverently Michael Angelo studied the
works of his predecessors, Massaccio, Lorenzo Ghiberti,
Donatello, and Jacopo della Quercia.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image27" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image27.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE LIBYAN SIBYL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a Photograph by Sig. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #27</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image28" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image28.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PROPHET JEREMIAH</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #28</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The first division above the High Altar represents the
creation of light. God separates light from darkness, and
brings order out of chaos. In the second division, one of
the larger pictures, God creates the sun and moon; He
<pb n="171" /><anchor id="Pg171" />passes on and spreads His hand in blessing over a segment
of the earth where the trees and herbs spring forth. In
the third, God gathers together in one place the waters
which were under the firmament. In these works Michael
Angelo designed a figure of the Creator that has remained
ever since the only possible pictorial symbol of God the
Father. He is like an old man in appearance and in
wisdom, but as alert and powerful as a young man. The
creation of Adam is the central composition of the ceiling.
The Deity, accompanied by six angels, gives life to Adam
by the touch of finger tips. The figure of Adam is the
most beautiful in modern art. It appears to have been
inspired by a Greek intaglio. The angels are much varied
in type. They are without the tinsel and gold embroidery
used by earlier artists to represent celestial glory.
The simple and solemn lines of the landscape showing the
curved surface of the globe give a cosmic character to the
scene, and the beautiful indigo blue of the distance forms
a fine background for the supremely modelled flesh. This
composition is the first in the order of execution in which
Michael Angelo fully realised his scheme of decoration,
as to scale and form, making a few figures fill the
space allotted to them with ease and freedom of movement.
Truly the space occupied appears to have been
arranged and cut specially to suit the figures, and not the
figures made, as was the fact, to fit the space. The next
compartment, the creation of Eve, is only less beautiful
than that of the Adam. It is small, and the space is a
little crowded: the composition is taken exactly from the
beautiful bas-relief by Jacopo della Quercia at Bologna.
The Almighty is shrouded in a voluminous mantle; Eve
joins her hands in worship. The figure is modelled with
<pb n="172" /><anchor id="Pg172" />a delicious softness, and the pearly colour is a delightful
rendering of the lighter flesh tints of woman, something
like the quality sought by Correggio in later times. The
Adam reclining in the corner fills that part of the space as
a good medal design fits its circumference; the grey of the
shadow, especially in the darker parts, envelops the figures
in a way that had never been attempted in fresco painting,
but is somewhat like a hand in shadow by Rembrandt. The
representations of the Fall and the Expulsion fill the next
compartment, a large one. Here we have another rendering
of a female nude; the type, and especially the modelling of
the flank, is a prophecy of the figure of Dawn in the Sacristy
of San Lorenzo. The upper part of the serpent has a woman's
form, and the junction is most admirably managed after
the manner of the sea maidens in Græco-Roman art. In
this story is the only foreground tree in full leaf ever
painted by Michael Angelo, and yet it is as supreme as
everything else. It is remarkable that the Paradise of
Michael Angelo should be such a rocky place, like the
side of a marble mountain, for in his time such places were
regarded with distaste. The landscape into which Adam
and Eve are expelled is a lone flat desert, where no
marble could be found. This part of the composition is
taken almost exactly from Massaccio's version in the
Brancacci Chapel. The Sacrifice of Noah fills the next,
a smaller compartment. It is placed, historically, before
the Deluge, and must be taken to represent how Noah,
the just man and perfect, and his family, found grace
in the eyes of the Lord. As there are five male persons
present, this scene cannot represent the sacrifice immediately
after the Flood, nor is any rainbow to be seen as
was usual in the traditional representations of that subject,
<pb n="173" /><anchor id="Pg173" />like the one in the Chiostro Verde at Santa Maria Novella.
Raphael also gives more figures than can be accounted for
as having been in the ark in his composition of the sacrifice
of Noah, in the series called the Bible of Raphael in the
Loggia. The large composition of the Deluge gives us
some idea of what the cartoon of Pisa may have been like.
There never was a collection of naked figures so many
and so beautiful. One is filled with sorrow at the idea of
their being drowned. They are all, too, engaged in noble
works; charity, energy, and inventiveness are amongst
the virtues they exhibit; there is no panic, or struggling
one with another; no anger or selfishness, excepting
only in the boat in the middle distance; a woman helps
her children, a man his wife, an old man bears a young
man in his arms, Priam carrying Æneas, an even more
pathetic imagination than Homer's; others attempt to
save their household goods; others erect a tent; others,
again, attempt to scale the sides of the ark or break into
it with axes&mdash;one cannot but hope they will succeed. The
female figures are especially beautiful in this picture, and
again we have a foretaste of that wonderful modelling of
the flank and thigh seen to perfection in the tombs at San
Lorenzo. The weird sea and sky, the ark and the dead
tree, show what Michael Angelo could do when he liked,
in departments of art other than the human figure.
The individual figures in the Deluge are difficult to see
on account of the smallness of scale in this part of the
vault. It must have been after seeing them from the floor
of the chapel, by removing some of the boards of his
scaffolding, that Michael Angelo determined to alter the
scale in the remaining compositions. In no other way can
we account for the change in the size of the Athletes, at
<pb n="174" /><anchor id="Pg174" />any rate. The difference of scale between those surrounding
the Sin of Ham over the large door, and those surrounding
the separation of Light from Darkness over the
High Altar, must be almost two feet. The increase is
gradual along the ceiling. Similarly the Sybilla Delphica
is very much smaller than the Sybilla Lybica, and the
Prophet Joel than the Prophet Jeremiah. The last composition
of this series&mdash;a small one&mdash;represents the Sin of
Ham, and was the first painted. The vat and the wine jug
are wonderful still-life, reminding us of Bassano.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image29" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image29.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE FLOOD</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">A DETAIL, SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a photograph by Sig. D. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #29</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The twenty Athletes that decorate the corners of these
central compositions, and support bronze medallions held in
place by oak garlands or by draperies, are nothing but the
most direct of transcripts from the nude model, but the most
noble that have been executed in the art of painting. They
are finished to the smallest detail, and are as truthful to
nature as it was possible for a man with an innate sense of
grandeur of line to make them. Italian models have been
posed in the positions of most of them, and drawings from
them compared with the photographs of these figures; they
are marvellously true, to the very wrinkles of the skin under
the arms and about the knees, and the drawing of the
curves and creases of the torso as the body bends. So
naturalistic are they that Michael Angelo must have posed
a model and made drawings in the chapel itself, perhaps
even on the scaffolding, and worked straight away. He
appears to have used only three models for this purpose.
The Athletes drawn from the same model can easily be
distinguished; they are actual portraits. One was the
man who sat for the Adam, and was of a noble proportion
with a small head, a beautiful brow, and a solemn
mouth. His hair was wavy and of a wispy character; he
<pb n="175" /><anchor id="Pg175" />had broad shoulders; his extremities were small, the thighs
large and well developed, showing the individual muscles
by large forms with flat planes. He may be seen, as we
have said, in the Adam, and in the four figures surrounding
the fresco representing God dividing the Light
from the Darkness; in the two figures near the Adam in
his creation of Eve; and best of all, for comparison,
in the figures near the foot of Adam in the creation
of Man. Another model was of a rounder and more
bacchanalian character, not unlike the Dancing Fawn in the
Uffizi; but he was not in such good training. He was decidedly
fat, his face was mobile, and very easily took jovial
expressions, his cheeks dimpled, his eyes round and large,
the pupils very dark and the whites very white; his hair
went into short, soft, frizzy curls; his shoulders were small and
round, the arms feeble, the thighs short, round, and formless;
his back was well developed, the folds of the skin in the
torso, when he bent, were very large and fat in line. It
was probably for this that Michael Angelo chose him.
He is well seen in three of the figures surrounding the
third panel from the High Altar representing The Spirit
of God upon the Face of the Waters, and the two figures
nearest to the Adam and Eve in the scene of the Expulsion.
The other model was of more ordinary but of still
very fine proportion. His head was rather large, and his
mouth petulant in expression, the upper eyelids very thick;
his hair is broken into large, hard curls. He is seen in the
figures surrounding the Sin of Ham, and was probably
the first employed for this work. These Athletes are the very
epitome of the work of Michael Angelo. If a man does
not love them he cannot care for the work of Michael
Angelo. They express his highest idea of beauty&mdash;man
<pb n="176" /><anchor id="Pg176" />created in the image of God, as he testifies in this vault,
and in the sonnet ending:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nè Dio, suo grazia, mi si mostra altrove,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Più che'n alcun leggiadro e mortal velo;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">E quel sol amo, perchè'n quel si specchia.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nor hath God deigned to show himself elsewhere</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">More clearly than in human form sublime</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Which, since they image Him, alone I love.<note place="foot"><p>J.A. Symonds. "The Sonnets of Michael Angelo and Campanella,"
No. lvi. p. 90.</p></note></l>
</lg>

<p>No leaves or branches, minor works of the Great Artist,
still less draperies of cloth or even of gold brocade, the
works of the hand of man, shall cover any portion of the
Divine Image. So all these figures are frankly naked, the
genii of the Beauty of the Human Race.</p>

<p>The festoons these Athletes carry support large medallions
painted like bronze. They were probably the portion
that Michael Angelo intended to finish with gilding, but
owing to the impatience of the Pope they were left in their
present state. They are a most valuable part of the
decorative scheme. Continuity is given by the repetition
of these bronze-coloured circles.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image30" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image30.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE BRAZEN SERPENT</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #30</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>A great cornice divides the scheme of the flat part of
the vault already described, and perhaps the first portion
executed, from the curved part containing the Prophets
and Sibyls. They are larger in scale and freer in style
than any portion of the flat part of the vault, as though
with practice Michael Angelo's hand had grown even
bolder than before. He may, too, have thought the new
scale of figures easier to see from the floor of the chapel,
for we must remember that this was his first experiment
in vault painting, and no doubt he would be glad to see
its effect from below when he was ordered to remove the
<pb n="177" /><anchor id="Pg177" />scaffolding, and he must have learnt by it. The Prophets
and Sibyls appear to be the last word of Michael Angelo
in decorative painting, as Raphael knew, for he assimilated
the teaching both in the beautiful figures of Sibyls at Santa
Maria della Pace and the Prophet Isaiah of San Agostino.
The motives of the genii or angels, wise children whispering
in the ears of the foretellers, seem to be inspired by the
sculpture of Giovanni Pisano as seen in the pilasters of the
pulpit of the Church of San Andrea at Pistoia.</p>

<p>It would be endless to try and tell all the thoughts
and emotions, both literary and artistic, suggested by the
contemplation of these figures and by the groups representing
the Ancestors of Christ. Suffice it to say, that all the
thoughts that come into the minds of the beholders are
as nothing compared to the thoughts that passed through
the mind of the solitary artist composing and painting
upon the high scaffolding of the quiet chapel.</p>

<p>The series of the Ancestors of Christ illustrate the life of
a being upon this earth, from the terrible moment when the
pregnant woman first feels the pangs of approaching labour,
in the semicircle of the window (inscribed Roboam, Abias)
to the lean and slippered pantaloon, who needs a stick to
help him rise from his seat (over the window inscribed
Salmon, Boaz, Obeth); there is the happy mother sleeping
with her infant wrapped in swaddling-clothes (Salmon,
Boaz, Obeth); and the old man playing with the children,
(Eleazr, Matthew); the student attentively poring over
his book regardless of the female figure, possibly Inspiration,
speaking to him from the other side of the window
(Naason). These figures, the Ancestors of Christ, are more
slightly painted than the rest of the vault. They loom
out of the darkness, caused by contrast to the light of the
<pb n="178" /><anchor id="Pg178" />windows they surround, grow in and out of the background
and have an atmospheric effect unequalled in
fresco painting. Those who walk from the Ponte Saint
Angelo up the Borgo to the Vatican any morning early
may see at the back of the dim recesses of the arched
cellar-like shops such groups as these. The series may be
regarded as the sketch-book of Michael Angelo, in which
he recorded his impressions of the life about him as he
trudged to his work.</p>

<p>The four triangular compositions that fill the corners of
the chapel, the four great Redemptions of Israel, are
absolute masterpieces of space arrangement, different
methods of overcoming the same difficulty being used in
each picture, from the two principal figures and the tent
in the David and Goliath to the marvellous crowd of
twisted limbs in the story of the Brazen Serpent. In the
composition of the Death of Holofernes Judith covers with
a napkin the severed head, which is carried in a basket on
the head of her handmaid; a most lovely group, said to
have been taken from an intaglio representing a vintage
scene, in which a nymph fills with grapes a basket supported
on the head of a companion.</p>

<p>Under each of the Prophets and Sibyls, upon the side
walls, is a decorative putto supporting the name plate,
standing at the springing of the arches, as in Donatello's
bas-relief representing Christ before Pilate, in the pulpit
of San Lorenzo. These ten beautiful figures are seldom
noticed, but evidently Raphael thought them worthy of
study, as may be seen in the lovely child-figure attributed
to him in the Accademia di San Lucca.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image31" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image31.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>JUDITH WITH THE HEAD OF HOLOFERNES</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of Messrs. Braun, Clement &amp; Co., in Dornach, Alsace</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #31</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The whole vault contains hardly one unworthy human
being, the only sins they commit are the Sins of Adam
<pb n="179" /><anchor id="Pg179" />and of Ham, necessary for the story. They are all beautiful
and all holy. Can Michael Angelo have had any thought
of the doom of these his creations, as exemplified by him
on the altar wall, twenty-two years afterwards? The great
work was finished, the public saw it, and, as Michael
Angelo says, "the Pope was very well pleased."</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="180" /><anchor id="Pg180" /><head>CHAPTER VII</head>

<head type="sub">THE RISEN CHRIST OF THE MINERVA</head>

<p>Julius II. died on February 21, 1513. He will ever be
remembered as the man who compelled Michael Angelo to
paint the Sistine vault. He was the best friend Michael
Angelo ever had, notwithstanding their bickerings, and he
understood him as no one ever did afterwards; but he
bequeathed to him the Tragedy of the Tomb. In 1514
Michael Angelo signed the agreement for a new commission:&mdash;</p>

<p>"Deed with Michael Angelo for the figure in
marble<note place="foot"><p>Milanesi Lettere, Contratti, &amp;c., xiv. p. 641.</p></note> of a Risen Christ for the Church of the Minerva,
in Rome. The 14 day of June, 1514. Let it be known
and manifest to whoever reads this scrip, how Messere
Bernardo Cencio, Canon of St. Peter's, and Messeri Mario
Scappucci and Metello Vari, have ordered Michael Angelo
di Lodovico Simoni, Sculptor, to carve a figure in marble
of Christ as large as life, nude, standing, bearing a cross,
in whatever attitude the said Michael Angelo thinks good,
for the price of two hundred gold ducats of the Camera,
to be paid in this manner, that is to say: At the present
time one hundred and fifty gold ducats of the Camera,
and the remainder, that is fifty similar ducats, the said
Messeri Mario and Metello delli Vari promise to pay when
<pb n="181" /><anchor id="Pg181" />the work is finished. As soon as the said Michael Angelo
begins to work on the said figure, which he promises to
place in the Minerva in whatever position the before-mentioned
shall approve; and at his own expense to make
a niche where the said figure is to be placed; and every
other adornment that should be needful, it is understood
that the before-mentioned Messer Bernardo and Messer
Mario shall supply at their own expense. This figure the
said Michael Angelo promises to do by the end of the
next four years, more or less as appears to him good,
engaging, however, that he will not exceed four years."</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image32" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image32.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ONE OF THE ANCESTORS OF CHRIST, OVER THE WINDOW
INSCRIBED "JESSE"</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #32</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Then follow their affirmations in due form. Metello
Vari dei Porcari, a Roman of an old family, appears to
have been the real patron to whom Michael Angelo was
responsible. The first block of marble was found to be
faulty, so another one had to be carved. The work was
not completed until 1521. It is now in the Church of
Santa Maria Sopra Minerva at Rome.</p>

<p>In 1515 Michael Angelo was still at work on the
Tomb, but apprehensive of interruption from Pope Leo.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto di Lodovico Simoni</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">in Florence</hi>.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buonarroto</hi>,&mdash;I have written the letter to Filipo
Strozzi; see if you like it and give it to him. If it is not
well, I know he will hold me excused, for it is not my profession;
enough if it serves its purpose. I wish you to go
to the Spedalingo<note place="foot"><p>The director of the hospital where Michael Angelo banked his
money.</p></note> of Santa Maria Nuova, and tell him to
pay to me here one thousand and four hundred ducats of
what he has of mine, because I must make a great effort
this summer to finish my work quickly, because I expect
<pb n="182" /><anchor id="Pg182" />soon to have to enter the Pope's service. And for this I
have bought perhaps twenty thousands of bronze for casting
certain figures. I must have money; so when you see
this arrange with the Spedalingo to have it paid over to
me; and if you are able to arrange with Pier Francesco
Borgerini, who is there, that he should have it paid to me
by his people here, I should be glad, for Pier Francesco
is my friend and will serve me well; and do not talk
about it for I wish it to be paid to me here secretly; and
for what remains at Santa Maria Nuova, accept security
from the Spedalingo, on account. I wait for the money.
No more.</p>

<p>"On the 16th day of June, 1515.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, in Rome."<note place="foot"><p>Milanese, Le Lettere, No. xcvii. p. 115.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>So now, besides the Moses and the Captives in marble,
the panels in relief were, perhaps, ready for casting. The
lower portions of the architectural base, now in San
Pietro in Vincula, were also probably finished. Half the
period spent by Michael Angelo in quarrying and road-making
for Pope Leo would have sufficed for the completion
of the Tomb, which would then have been a monument
of Michael Angelo's power as a sculptor, fit to rank
with the monument of his power as a painter in the Sistine
Chapel: a monument containing four figures, equal
in execution and size to the Moses, twelve figures like the
Slaves, altogether some forty statues and numerous bronze
bas-reliefs besides. It is a great misfortune that we have
no bronze bas-reliefs by Michael Angelo, for all his works
prove that his genius would have been well expressed in
this art.</p>

<pb n="183" /><anchor id="Pg183" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image33" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image33.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ONE OF THE ANCESTORS OF CHRIST, OVER THE WINDOW
INSCRIBED "IORAM"</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Reproduced by permission from a photograph by Sig. D. Anderson, Rome</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #33</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The early years of the Pontificate of Leo X. were
wasted over the project for the facade of San Lorenzo.
Michael Angelo was continually at Carrara. In a letter,
dated May 8, 1517, to Domenico Buoninsegna, Michael
Angelo writes with enthusiasm about his new scheme, and
undertakes to carry it out for 35,000 golden ducats in six
years. Buoninsegna replied that the Cardinal expressed
the highest satisfaction at "the great heart he had for
conducting the work of the façade." The friendly relations
of Michael Angelo with the natives of Carrara continued
until the Pope obliged him to leave their quarries and
open up those of Pietra Santa, in Tuscan territory, by
which act Michael Angelo lost much time. He had positively
to make roads down the mountains and over the
marshes before he could get a single block to the river.
The Marquis of Carrara became his enemy, and the
contracts with the people of Carrara caused him much
annoyance and great loss. The orders from Rome were
peremptory and had to be obeyed.<note place="foot"><p>Michael Angelo wrote a postscript to letter No. cxvi.: "Oh, cursed
a thousand times the day and hour when I left Carrara! This is the
cause of my utter ruin. But I shall go back there soon. Nowadays it
is a sin to do one's duty."</p></note> Ten years of the best
of Michael Angelo's working life were wasted; the numberless
delays of this period, and the delays over the Tomb of
Julius, positively seem to have changed the character of
the artist from a man of action to a man of thought.
Possibly advancing age had something to do with it; but
the fact remains that the man who executed the bronze
statue of Julius in two years, and painted the vault of the
Sistine in less than three years, took seven years to finish
the Last Judgment, which covers a surface about one-third
<pb n="184" /><anchor id="Pg184" />the extent of the vault, and also is in a much more favourable
position for painting.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>There is a document shown in the rooms of the State
Archives at the Uffizi that belongs to this period; it
is a memorial addressed by the Florentine Academy to
Pope Leo X., asking him to authorise the translation of
the bones of Dante from Ravenna, where they still rest
under "the little cupola, more neat than solemn," to
Florence. It is dated October 20, 1518. All but one of the
signatures appended are written in Latin; that one is as
follows:&mdash;"I, Michael Angelo, the sculptor, pray the like of
your Holiness, offering my services to the divine poet for
the erection of a befitting sepulchre to him in some honour-place
in this city." Michael Angelo's devotion to Dante
was well known to his contemporaries; he is known to
have filled a book with drawings to illustrate the "Divina
Com media"; this volume perished at sea, whilst in the
possession of the sculptor Antonio Montanti, who was
shipwrecked on a journey from Leghorn to Rome.</p>

<p>On April 17, 1517, Michael Angelo bought some
ground in the Via Mozza, now Via San Zanobi, Florence,
from the Chapter of Santa Maria del Fiore, to build a
workshop for finishing his marbles; the purchase was completed
on November 24, 1518. This studio remained in his
possession until his death. He describes it to Lionardo di
Compago, the saddle-maker, as an excellent workshop,
where twenty statues can be set up together.</p>

<p>Meanwhile he went on working at Pietra Santa for the
façade. In August 1518, he writes:&mdash;--</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image34" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image34.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>ONE OF THE ANCESTORS OF CHRIST, OVER THE WINDOW
INSCRIBED "ASA"</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #34</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"The place of quarrying is very rugged, and the workmen
are very ignorant of this sort of work. So for some
<pb n="185" /><anchor id="Pg185" />months I must be very patient until the mountains are
tamed and the men are mastered. Then we shall get on
more quickly. Enough, what I have promised that will I
do by some means, and I will make the most beautiful
thing that has ever been done in Italy if God helps me."</p>
</quote>

<p>The melancholy end of this scheme is told in a Ricordo
in the Archivio Buonarroti, March 10, 1520.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"Now Pope Leo, perhaps, to carry out more quickly
the above-mentioned façade of San Lorenzo than according
to the agreement he made with me, and I consenting,
sets me free, and for all the above-said money that I have
received, are counted the road that I have made to Pietra
Santa, and the marbles that were quarried there and rough-hewn
as may be seen to-day; and he declares himself content
and satisfied with me, as is said, about all the money
received for the said façade of San Lorenzo, and every other
work that I have had to do for him until this tenth day of
March, 1519; and so he leaves me my freedom, and not
obliged to render account to any one for anything that I
have had to do for him or with others for him."<note place="foot"><p>Milanese. Ricordi, &amp;c., p. 581.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>We have a series of most interesting letters from
Sebastiano del Piombo, Michael Angelo's favourite gossip
in Rome; most of them are dated from 1520 to 1533, and
give Michael Angelo at Carrara news of Sebastiano and the
art world of Rome, They often relate to designs that
Sebastiano wished to get from Michael Angelo in order
that he might be entrusted with commissions from the Pope
that would otherwise be given to the scholars of Raphael.
In one, dated October 27, 1520, he says:&mdash;</p>

<pb n="186" /><anchor id="Pg186" /><quote rend="display">
<p>"For I know how much the Pope values you, and when
he speaks of you it is as if he were speaking of his own
brother, almost with tears in his eyes; for he has told
me that you were brought up together, and shows that
he knows and loves you. But you frighten everybody,
even Popes!"<note place="foot"><p>Milanese. "Les Correspondants de Michel Ange," p. 24.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>Michael Angelo seems to have taken exception to the
remark, for Sebastiano in his next letter but one says:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"As to what you reply to me about your terribleness, I
for my part do not find you terrible; and if I have not
written to you about this, do not wonder, for you do not
appear to me terrible except only in art&mdash;that is to say,
the greatest master that has ever been; so it seems to me
if I am in error I am to blame. I have no more to say.
Christ keep you safe. 9th day of November, 1520.
Remember me to friend Leonardo and to Master Pier
Francesco.</p>

<p>"Your most faithful gossip,</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bastiano</hi>, Painter, in Rome.</p>

<p>"The Lord Michael Angelo de Bonarotis, the most
worthy sculptor, Florence."<note place="foot"><p>.<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid.</hi> p. 24.</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>After Michael Angelo had been dismissed from the
work of the façade of San Lorenzo he appears to have
remained quietly at Florence, possibly engaged upon the
marbles for the Tomb of Julius II. About the same
time, at the instigation of the Cardinal de' Medici, he
began to design the new sacristy and the tombs at San
Lorenzo.</p>

<pb n="187" /><anchor id="Pg187" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image50" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image50.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PROPHET JONAH</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #50</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>In the Ricordi, which run from April 9 to August
19, 1521, he says that on April 9 he received two
hundred ducats from the Cardinal de' Medici to go to
Carrara and lodge there, to quarry marbles for the tombs
which are to be placed in the new sacristy at San Lorenzo.
"And there I stayed about twenty days and made out
drawings to scale, and measured models in clay for the
said tombs." On August 16 the contractors for the
blocks, all of which were excavated from the old Roman
quarry of Polvaccio, came to Florence, and were paid on
account.</p>

<p>The statue of the "Risen Christ" was forwarded to Rome
during the summer. The smaller detached, or more easily
broken portions, were left in the rough to prevent accidents
during the journey, and Pietro Urbino went to
Rome with orders to complete the work there. Sebastiano
del Piombo, like the good friend he was, kept Michael
Angelo informed of the progress of the young scamp of a
pupil, from whom his master had extracted a promise that
he would avoid the company of dissolute Florentines in
Rome more than he had previously done. On November 9,
1520, Sebastiano writes that his gossip, Giovanni da
Reggio, "goes about saying that you have not done the
figure yourself, but that it is the work of Pietro Urbino.
Be sure that it may be seen to be from your hand, so that
poltroons and babblers may burst." This was written
whilst the work was still at Florence. On September 6,
1531, after it had arrived at Rome, Sebastiano says of
Pietro: "Firstly, you sent him to Rome with the statue,
to finish and erect it. What he did and did not do you
know; but I must let you understand that wherever he has
worked he has maimed it. Chiefly, he has shortened the
<pb n="188" /><anchor id="Pg188" />right foot, and it is plainly seen that he has cut off the
toes. He has shortened the fingers of the hands, too, more
especially those of the one which holds the cross, the right;
Frizzi says, it seems to have been worked by a cake-maker,
not carved in marble. It looks as if it had been made by
one who worked in dough, it is so stunted. I do not
understand these things, not knowing the manner of working
in marble; but I can very well tell you that those
fingers look to me very stumpy. I can tell you, too, that
it is easy to see he has been working on the beard. I believe
a baby would have had more discretion; it looks as though
he had done the hair with a knife without a point; but
this can easily be remedied. He has also cut one of the
nostrils, so that with a little more the whole nose would
have been spoiled, so that no one but God could have
mended it, and I believe God inspired you to write your
last letter to Master Zovane da Reggio, my comrade, for
if the figure had remained in the hands of Pietro he would
undoubtedly have ruined it." Michael Angelo transferred
the work of finishing from Pietro to Federigo Frizzi.
Sebastiano goes on to say: "Pietro is most malignant
now that he is cast off by you. He does not seem to value
you or any one else alive, but thinks he is a great master;
he will find out what he is fast enough, for I believe the
poor young man will never know how to make statues.
He has forgotten the art. The knees of your statue are
worth more than all Rome."</p>

<p>Frizzi mended up the mistakes and finished the work
on the hair, face, hands, feet, cross, and the parts undercut.
Michael Angelo was evidently anxious as to the result
of this touching up, and as he was much attached to
Vari, he offered to make a new statue, but the courtly
<pb n="189" /><anchor id="Pg189" />Roman replied that he was entirely satisfied with the one
he had received. He regarded it and esteemed it as a
thing of gold, and said that Michael Angelo's offer proved
his noble soul and generosity, inasmuch as when he had
already made what could not be surpassed and was incomparable,
he still wanted to serve his friend better.<note place="foot"><p>The letters of Vari are in the Buonarroti Archives, Cod. xi.,
No. 740-761; Symonds, vol. i. p. 362.</p></note></p>

<p>This Christ of the Minerva is like a late Greek embodiment
of the Christian ideal; it is a work that has
been a good deal criticised, particularly as to the details,
which the letters just quoted prove to have been finished
by assistants away from the supervision of the master.
The arms and torso, and, as Sebastiano justly says, the
knees, are very splendid, and if the spoiled head and
extremities were broken away the fragment, that is to
say, the part really executed by the master, would be as
famous as many a fine work of Greece or of Old Rome.
As it stands near a column in the centre of the church in
a subdued light it has a presence of great beauty and
sweetness, never allied with so much power before, notwithstanding
that brazen draperies and a sandal hide much of
the reverent workmanship.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="190" /><anchor id="Pg190" /><head>CHAPTER VIII</head>

<head type="sub">THE SACRISTY OF SAN LORENZO</head>

<p>After the death of Leo X., on December 1, 1521,
Adrian IV. was elected to fill the seat of St. Peter. He
was not an Italian and loved not the arts. He is recorded
to have called statues "idols of the Pagans," and he
spent no money on pictures or frescoes. No wonder the
artists who were accustomed to the patronage of the Popes
rejoiced when he died, notwithstanding his goodness, and
hailed his physician as saviour of the Fatherland. The
Cardinal Giuliano de' Medici was elected in his stead,
under the name of Clement VII., and Michael Angelo
expressed the feelings of most of his countrymen and all
the artists when he wrote to his friend, Topolino, at Carrara
"You will have heard how the Medici is made
Pope; it seems to me that all the world is glad of it, so
I imagine that here (Florence) many things will soon be
set going in art. Therefore, serve well and with faithfulness,
so that we may have honour."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. ccclxxx., p. 423 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image35" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image35.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE TOMB OF LORENZO DE' MEDICI, DUKE OF URBINO</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY, SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #35</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>In the year 1523 the Senate of Genoa banked 300
ducats towards the expenses of a colossal statue of Andrea
Doria, the great sea-captain, to be carved by Michael
Angelo. Unfortunately Michael Angelo was unable to
execute this congenial task. There is a magnificent
<pb n="191" /><anchor id="Pg191" />portrait of this prince, as Neptune, by Sebastiano del Piombo
in the private rooms of the Doria Palace at Rome. The
admiral points down with Michael Angelesque forefinger
as though he were condemning his enemies to descend to
the lowest depths of the sea. It looks as if it had been
inspired by a drawing of Michael Angelo's, possibly for
this statue, which may have been designed as a nude
figure of Neptune; the parapet in front of the picture
is decorated with a painted bas-relief of a Roman
galley.</p>

<p>Michael Angelo's last known letter to his father is
supposed to have been written in June 1523.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. xliv., p. 55 (in the British Museum).</p></note> It is a
bitter complaint of the testy manner in which his father
always treated him, and the continual interruptions of his
work. It must have been a great grief to Michael Angelo
when the old man came to die if he had not made up this
quarrel with him, for he loved him in a way that is marvellous
to us when we consider the character of the old
man as evidenced in the correspondence.</p>

<p>Clement VII. lost no time, after he was elected Pope,
in setting Michael Angelo to work, but again it was
against the inclination of the artist, who passionately
desired to complete the Tomb of Julius, partly for the
love of his memory and partly to free himself from the
importunity of the executors, who threatened him with a
lawsuit. Michael Angelo replied to the agent of Clement,
Francesco Fattucci, who requested plans for the Laurentian
Library: "I understand from your last that his Holiness
our Lord wishes that the design for the Library should be
by my hand. I have heard nothing and do not know
where he wishes it to be built. True, Stefano talked to
<pb n="192" /><anchor id="Pg192" />me about it, but I did not give my mind to it. When
he returns from Carrara I will inform myself about it
from him, and will do all I can, although it is not my
profession."</p>

<p>Clement, who really seems to have had a regard for the
artist, and wished to bind him to his interests, desired to
provide for him for life. If Michael Angelo would have
consented to make the vows of celibacy he would have
given him an ecclesiastical appointment, failing that he
offered him a pension. Michael Angelo only asked for
fifteen ducats a month. Fattucci, on January 13, 1524,
rebuked him for this modesty, and wrote that "Jacopo
Salviati has given orders that Spina should be instructed
to pay you a monthly provision of fifty ducats." A house
also was assigned to him at San Lorenzo, rent free, that he
might be near his work. Stefano di Tomaso, miniatore,
was Michael Angelo's right-hand man at this time, and his
name continually recurs in the Ricordi. He was not altogether
a satisfactory servant, and in April 1524, Antonio
Mini seems to have taken his place. This helps us to date
the roofing of the sacristy of San Lorenzo, as in an undated
letter to Pope Clement Michael Angelo says that
Stefano finished the lantern and it was universally admired.
This is the work of which it is recorded that when folk
told Michael Angelo it would be better than the lantern
of Brunelleschi, he replied: "Different, perhaps; but
better, no!" In the British Museum there is a drawing
with a bit of advice to young artists, personified in his
new pupil, Antonio Mini. It is in Michael Angelo's own
hand:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Disegna Antonio, disegna Antonio, disegna e non perder tempo.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">Draw Antonio, draw Antonio, draw and do not lose time.</p>

<p><pb n="193" /><anchor id="Pg193" />And now in August 1524,<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccxc. p. 437. Milanese dates this letter August 8,
1524. Michael Angelo to Giovanni Spina; he signs it "at San
Lorenzo."</p></note> the Tombs of the Medici
in the new sacristy were fairly under way. There are several
preliminary designs in the Print Room of the British
Museum, the Albertina at Vienna, and the Uffizi, Florence.<note place="foot"><p>Several are by the hand of Michael Angelo, but some are done in
the mannered style of the architectural draughtsman of the period, and
suggest a Florentine assistant.</p></note>
The first idea was for the tombs to be isolated in
the centre of the chapel, but we gather from a letter,
written in May 1524,<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. 158</p></note> that it had already been decided
to have mural monuments. The sarcophagi were to support
portrait statues of the Dukes and Popes, of Lorenzo
and his brother Giuliano. At the foot were to be six
rivers, two under each tomb&mdash;the Arno, Tiber, Metauro,
Po, Taro, and Ticino. The drawings go to prove that
the architectural background, as we see it now, is as incomplete
as it looks. Some of the drawings have elaborate
candlesticks at the top; others a circular panel supported
by putti. In several the first ideas for some of the final
forms may be seen, but one point is very important:
in almost every case the sarcophagi are large enough to
support the figure or figures to be placed upon them, and
never do we see that uncomfortable arrangement by which
the figures appear to be sliding off their supports. Letters
to Fattucci in October 1525, and April 1526,<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, Nos. cd. and cdii. pp. 450, 453.</p></note> give us an
idea of the progress of the works. "I am working as
hard as I can, and in fifteen days I intend to begin the
other captain. Afterwards the only important things left
will be the four rivers. The four figures on the top of the
<pb n="194" /><anchor id="Pg194" />sarcophagi, the four figures on the ground which are the
rivers, the two captains and Our Lady, who is to be placed
upon the tomb at the head of the chapel; these are the
figures I mean to carve with my own hand, and of them I
have begun six; and I have sufficient spirit to finish them
in a convenient time, and bring partially forward the
others which are not of so much importance." The six
he had begun are those that are now in the chapel. The
Giuliano and Lorenzo, Day and Night, Dawn and Evening.
The Madonna, perhaps Michael Angelo's finest work
in sculpture, was also carved by his own hand; the two
other works, now in the chapel representing the patron
saints of the Medici family, Cosmo and Damiano, were
carved by Montelupo and Montorsoli; they do not seem
to have anything of Michael Angelo about them, not even
in design.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbino, the
executor of Julius, was pressing the affair of the Tomb;
he threatened a lawsuit to recover money advanced for
the work. Michael Angelo appeals to the Pope in a letter
addressed to Giovanni Spina, of April 19, 1525:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image36" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image36.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE TOMB OF GIULIANO DE' MEDICI, DUKE OF NEMOURS</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY, SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #36</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"It seems to me it is no good sending a power of
attorney about the Tomb of Pope Julius, because I do
not want to plead. They cannot bring a suit against
me if I acknowledge that I am in the wrong; so I assume
that I have sued and lost, and have to pay; and this I am
disposed to do if I am able. Therefore, if the Pope will
help me in this, as intermediary, and it would be the greatest
blessing to me, seeing that I am not able to finish the said
Tomb of Julius, both on account of my age and infirmity,
he might express his will that I should repay what I have
<pb n="195" /><anchor id="Pg195" />received for doing it, so as to release me of this burden,
and so that the relatives of Pope Julius, with this repayment,
may have the work done to their satisfaction by any
one they like. Thus his Holiness our Lord could please me
very greatly. Still, I wish to pay back as little as possible
in reason. Making them listen to some of my arguments,
such as the time spent for the Pope at Bologna, and other
time lost without any payment, as Ser Giovanni Francesco,
whom I have informed of everything, knows. As soon as
I know clearly what I have to restore, I will make a division
of what I have, sell, and arrange my affairs so as to
repay all. Then I shall be able to think of the Pope's
business, and work. If this is not done I cannot work.
There is no way more safe for myself, nor more agreeable,
nor more likely to clear my spirit. It can be done amicably
without a lawsuit. I pray to God that the Pope may
become willing to arrange it in this fashion, for it does not
seem to me that any one else can do it."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccxciv. p. 442 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>
</quote>

<p>Michael Angelo had a wholesome fear of the law, not
because he was guilty but because of the power of his
antagonist. There can be no doubt that he was perfectly
honest in these transactions, and, as Pope Clement said,
he was rather creditor than debtor. Clement appears to
have arranged matters to some extent with the executors,
and we have a hint of the new arrangement in a letter by
Michael Angelo to Fattucci,<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cd. p. 450 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note> dated Florence, October 24,
1525:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giovan Francesco</hi>,&mdash;In reply to your last,
the four statues I have in hand are not yet finished, and
<pb n="196" /><anchor id="Pg196" />much has still to be done upon them. The four others,
for rivers, are not begun, because the marble was wanting,
but now it has come. I do not tell you how because there
is no need. With regard to the affair of Julius, I wish to
make the Tomb like that of Pius in St. Peter's, as you
have written, and will do so little by little, now one piece
and now another, and will pay for it out of my own
pocket, if I hold my pension and my house, as you have
written; that is to say, the house where I lived yonder in
Rome, with the marbles and movables therein. So that
I should not have to give to them, I mean to the heirs
of Julius, in order to be quit of the Tomb contract, anything
of what I have received hitherto, except the said
Tomb, completed, like that of Pius in Saint Peter's.
Moreover, I undertake to perform the work within a
reasonable time, and to finish the statues with my own
hand." He now turns to his annoyances at San Lorenzo:
"And given my pension as was said, I will never stop
working for Pope Clement with what strength I have,
though that be little, for I am old. At the same time I
must not be slighted and affronted as I am now, for it
weighs greatly on my spirits, and has prevented me from
doing what I wished to do these many months; one cannot
work at one thing with the hands, and at another with
the brain, and especially in marble. 'Tis said here that
these annoyances are meant to spur me on; but I maintain
that those are scurvy spurs that make a good steed
jib. I have not touched my pension during the last year,
and struggle with poverty. I am alone in my troubles,
and have many of them, which keep me more busy
than my art, for I cannot keep a servant for lack of
means."</p>
</quote>

<p><pb n="197" /><anchor id="Pg197" />There is a kind letter from Michael Angelo to Sebastiano
del Piombo that belongs to this period, May 1525.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccxcvii. p. 446 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note>
It refers to a picture by Sebastiano, probably the portrait
of Anton Francesco degli Albizzi, referred to in letter
cccxcvi.:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">My Most Dear Sebastiano</hi>,&mdash;Last evening our friend
the Capitano Cuio<note place="foot"><p>Surnamed Dini; he fell in the sack of Rome.</p></note> and certain other gentlemen were so
good as to invite me to sup with them, which gave me
very great pleasure, since it took me a little out of my
melancholy, or rather folly. Not only did I enjoy the
supper, which was very good, but I had far more pleasure
in the conversation, and more than all it increased my
pleasure to hear your name mentioned by the said Capitano
Cuio; nor was this all, for it further rejoiced me exceedingly
to hear from the Capitano that, in art, you are peerless
in the world, and that so you were esteemed in Rome.
If I could have rejoiced more I would have done so. So
you see my judgment is not false, therefore do not any
more deny that you are peerless, when I tell it you, for I
have too many witnesses. And behold there is a picture
of yours here, God be thanked, which wins credence for
me with every one who can see daylight."</p>
</quote>

<p>From the Ricordi we learn that Michael Angelo was
busy with the Library of San Lorenzo. He had in his
employ stone hewers and masters in various crafts: Tasio
and Carota for wood carving, Battista del Cinque and
Ciapino for carpentry, and Giovanni da Udine, a pupil of
Raphael, for the grotesque decoration for the dome of the
chapel. Clement added a postscript in his own hand to
one of his secretary's letters: "Thou knowest that Popes
<pb n="198" /><anchor id="Pg198" />have no long lives; and we cannot yearn more than we
do to behold the chapel with the tombs of our kinsmen,
or, at any rate, to hear that it is finished. And so also
the library. Wherefore we recommend both to thy diligence.
Meanwhile we will betake us (as thou said'st
erstwhile) to a wholesome patience, praying God that He
may put it into thy heart to push the whole forward together.
Fear not that either work to do or rewards shall
fail thee while we live. Farewell; with the blessing of
God and ours.&mdash;<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Julius</hi>." (Clement signs with his baptismal
name.)<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccxcix. p. 448 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<p>The Pope set Michael Angelo to make a Sacrarium
for the relics belonging to San Lorenzo. It was placed
above the entrance door of the church, and the details of
that portion of the interior were altered for it. A design
by Michael Angelo at Oxford is for part of these alterations.
Another commission Clement desired Michael
Angelo to undertake was of a curiously absurd character.
Fattucci wrote to say that the Pope wished a colossal
statue to be erected on the piazza of San Lorenzo, opposite
the Stufa Palace. The giant was to top the roof of the
Medician Palace, with its face turned in that direction
and its back to the house of Luigi della Stufa. Being so
huge it would have to be constructed of separate pieces
fitted together. This project, evidently intended as a
truly Florentine insult to the house of Stufa, did not
please Michael Angelo, and his letter, of October 1525,
in reply is an instance of his heavy, elephantine
humour:&mdash;</p>

<pb n="199" /><anchor id="Pg199" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image37" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image37.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>LORENZO DE MEDICI, DUKE OF URBINO</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY, SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #37</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To my dear friend</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messere Giovan Francesco</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">priest of
Saint Mary of the Flower of Florence, in Rome.</hi></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giovan Francesco</hi>,&mdash;If I had as much
strength as I have had pleasure from your last letter, I
should expect to carry out, and that quickly, all the things
you write to me about, but as I have not I will do what I
can.</p>

<p>"About the colossus of forty braccia, of which you tell
me, that is to go, or rather to be erected, at the corner
of the loggia of the Medician garden, opposite the corner
of Messer Luigi della Stufa, I have thought of it not a
little, as you told me, and it seems to me that it would not
do in that corner, for it would take up too much of the
roadway; but in the other corner, where the barber's shop
is, it would turn out much better according to my way of
thinking, because it has the piazza in front of it and would
not be so much in the way; and perhaps as they would not
allow the shop to be removed, for love of the income from
it, I have been thinking that the said figure might be in
a sitting position, and the seat high, the said work to be
hollow within, as is right when working in pieces, so that
the barber's shop would come underneath, and the rent
would not be lost. And again, so that the said shop may
have wherewithal to dispose of its smoke as it has now, it
occurred to me to give the said statue a horn of plenty in
its hand, hollow within, which would serve for the chimney.
Then having the head of the said figure empty, like the
other members, of that also I believe we could make some
use, for there is here in the piazza a huckster, very much my
friend, who tells me in secret that it would make a very
fine dovecot. Another fancy strikes me that would be
<pb n="200" /><anchor id="Pg200" />much better, but we should have to make the figure ever
so much larger. And it might be done, for a tower is
built up of pieces; and that is, that the head should serve
as campanile for San Lorenzo, which needs one badly.
And the bells hanging within, the sound clanging from
the mouth, it would seem that the said colossus were
howling for mercy, and especially on feast days, when they
ring oftenest and with the largest bells.</p>

<p>"About the transport for the marbles for the above-mentioned
statue, so that no one shall know of it, meseems
they should come by night and well covered up, so that
they may not be seen. There will be danger at the gates,
and we must provide for it somehow; at the worst, we
shall have San Gallo.<note place="foot"><p>The gate called San Gallo, which remained open until daylight.</p></note></p>

<p>"As to doing, or not doing, the things that are to do,
and which you say may stand over, it is better to let
them be done by those who will do them, for I have so
much to do that I do not care to undertake more. To
me it will suffice if it be something worthy.</p>

<p>"I do not reply to all you say, for lo Spina comes
shortly to Rome, and will answer your letter by word of
mouth, and more in detail than I can with the pen.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo</hi>, Sculptor, in Florence."</p>
</quote>

<p>This letter had its desired effect, nothing more was
heard of the colossus.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>The Sack of Rome in 1527 by the rabble of Germany
and Spain, called the Imperial army, naturally stopped
all artistic work, for war is the worst enemy of art.
Clement was besieged in the Castle Saint Angelo for nine
<pb n="201" /><anchor id="Pg201" />months, and the Medici lost their power in Florence.
The Cardinal of Cortona, with the young princes Ippolito
and Alessandro de' Medici, fled, and Niccolo Capponi was
elected President of the Popular Government. Michael
Angelo was in Florence all this time. A Ricordo given in
Lettere, p. 598, says: "I record how, some days ago, Piero
di Filippo Gondi asked to enter the new sacristy at San
Lorenzo to hide there certain goods of his because of the
peril in which we now find ourselves. This evening of the
29th of April, 1527, he has begun to bring in certain
bundles. He says they are linen of his sisters, and I, not
to witness what he does, or where he hides the stuff, have
given him the key of the said sacristy this said evening."</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Upon July 2, 1528, Michael Angelo's favourite
brother, Buonarroto, died of the plague. Gotti tells how
Michael Angelo held his brother in his arms<note place="foot"><p>Vol. i. p. 207.</p></note> while he
was dying, notwithstanding the great risk to his own life,
and took care of his family after his death. There are
minutes of the expenses he incurred; the clothes were
burnt to avoid infection; he repaid the widow Bartolommea
her dowry, placed his niece Francesca in a convent
until she was of an age to marry, and provided for his
nephew Lionardo, as if for a son of his own.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>The citizens of Florence, fearing the anger of the
Pope and his new allies, now that their power was in
the ascendant, prepared to endure a siege. Michael
Angelo was appointed general over the construction
of the walls and defences of the city in 1529. He had
many difficulties with the council; often they objected
<pb n="202" /><anchor id="Pg202" />to his plan of fortifying the heights of San Miniato.
Michael Angelo went to Pisa and Arezzo to superintend
the strengthening of the works there. He was sent also to
Ferrara with letters from the Signori and the Ten to the
Duke, the greatest Italian authority upon fortification,
and to their envoy, Galeotto Giugni, who wrote to inform
the Florentines that Michael Angelo refused to abandon
the inn and receive the hospitality of the Duke, who with
great honour personally conducted him over the fortresses
and walls of Ferrara; no doubt at the same time showing
him his art collections. It would be interesting to know if
Michael Angelo looked upon the portrait-head of Julius II.,
broken from his Bologna statue, when the bronze was
turned into a cannon. Perhaps he also saw La Giulia, the
cannon herself. It may be that amongst the engraved
gems in the Duke's collection was one representing "Leda
and the Swan," and that Michael Angelo talked with
the Duke as to the possibilities of this composition for
pictorial treatment. Soon after Michael Angelo returned
to Florence he received warning from a mysterious person
that there was treachery in the garrison, so he fled to
Venice. He had no idea of wasting his life uselessly when
he thought certain destruction was before the city, and so
he determined to leave Italy and accept the overtures that
had been made to him from the Court of France. The
courage that fears not to undertake the greatest and most
difficult works is of a different temper from that of a soldier,
a bravo, or a Benvenuto Cellini; all the noble and virtuous
qualities cannot belong to one hero. Unfortunately, the
judgment of Michael Angelo turned out to be right after
all. Nevertheless, hearing better news, and hoping against
hope, he courageously returned to Florence in her
<pb n="203" /><anchor id="Pg203" />extremity and went on with the fortifications. Some of the
works at San Miniato still remain. Vauban is said to have
found them of such interest that he surveyed and measured
them. During this sad time Michael Angelo laboured in
secret at the tombs of the Medici. The sad and despairing
thoughts of the artist are evident in the work he produced.
No one can enter that solemn sacristy without feeling the
spirit of deepest sadness brooding over all&mdash;Il Penseroso,
and the figures of Day and of Night, of Morning and of
Evening.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>The city fell in August 1530. Marco Dandolo, of
Venice, when he heard of it, exclaimed aloud, "Baglioni has
put upon his head the cap of the biggest traitor upon
record." The prominent citizens who escaped, including
Michael Angelo, were outlawed and their property confiscated.
Many who remained in the city were imprisoned,
tortured, and beheaded. Michael Angelo hid himself, the
Senator Filippo Buonarroti says, in the bell-tower of San
Nicolo beyond Arno.<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. 199. San Nicolo is a little church on the way to San
Miniato; the tower forms the foreground in the view from the top of
the hill.</p></note> After the fury was over and
Clement's anger abated, Michael Angelo, hearing a message
of peace from the Pope, came forth from his hiding-place
and resumed work on the statues at San Lorenzo,
moved thereto more by fear of the Pope than by love of
the Medici. During November or December his pension
of fifty crowns a month was renewed, the Pope's agent in
Florence being Battista Figiovanni, Prior of San Lorenzo.</p>

<p>In 1528 a block of marble had been assigned to Michael
Angelo, from which he determined to extract a heroic
<pb n="204" /><anchor id="Pg204" />group of Hercules and Cacus. There is a small wax
model of this composition at South Kensington, attributed
to Michael Angelo, which may be for this design. The
Medici Government handed over the blocks to the craven
Baccio Bandinelli, who produced the horrible work, representing
the same subject, now in front of the Palazzo
Vecchio.</p>

<p>The Leda for the Duke of Ferrara,<note place="foot"><p>See p. 61.</p></note> but presented by
Michael Angelo to his pupil Mini, was painted during
the siege. It was probably a design from some antique
gem in the Duke's cabinet. The original, and a copy by
Benedetto Bene, were taken to Paris by Antonio Mini,
where they passed into the possession of the King.
Michael Angelo's Leda hung at Fontainebleau until the
time of Louis XIII., when a Minister of State, M. Desnoyers,
ordered its destruction, as it seemed to him to be an
improper picture. Pierre Mariette informs us that the
picture was only hidden away, and that it reappeared and
was seen by him. It was restored and sent to England.
In the offices of the National Gallery is the best edition
of this picture. The head and arm are repainted, but
the thigh and hip are modelled in a magnificent style
that reminds us of the figure of Night in the Medician
tombs that he was at this very time carving. From the
power of this portion of the work we may assume that it
is the damaged and much restored original by Michael
Angelo.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image38" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image38.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE HEAD OF THE DAWN</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY, SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #38</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Vasari informs us that about this time "he began a
statue, of three cubits, in marble. It was an Apollo drawing
a shaft from his quiver. This he nearly finished. It
stands now in the chamber of the Prince of Florence, a
<pb n="205" /><anchor id="Pg205" />thing of rare beauty, though not quite completed." This
work was presented by the artist to Baccio Valori, the
powerful agent of the Medici. It is now in one of the
upper rooms of the Bargello, in Florence. The rough
hatchings of the chisel lines are everywhere visible; the
figure is palpitating with life under a veil of hewn marble;
the pose of the young god as he glides along and turns
his head over his shoulder is one of the most beautiful and
graceful Michael Angelo ever imagined. Until 1533
Michael Angelo worked at the Medici monuments. The
ever recurring trouble about the Tomb of Julius distracted
him in 1532; a new contract was made out in the
May of that year, and Michael Angelo evidently expected
that he would have to go to Rome about it. This may be
gathered from the important letter written on February 24,
1531, by Sebastiano del Piombo, in Rome, to Michael
Angelo, in Florence; it marks the renewal of the intercourse
of the two old friends after the dangers and troubles
they had passed through during the siege of Florence and
the sack of Rome. Sebastiano's previous letter, as far as
we know, is dated April 25, 1525:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">1531, 24th February.</hi></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">My Dearest Comrade</hi>,&mdash;By Master Domenico, called
Menichella, who has been to see me on your behalf. God
knows how dear it was to me. After so many sorrows,
hardships, and dangers, Almighty God has left us alive
and well in His mercy and pity. A fact truly miraculous
when I think over it; everlasting thanks to His Divine
Majesty, and if I could express to you with my pen
the anxiety and worry I have had on your account you
would marvel at it. The Signor Fernando di Gonzaga
will bear me witness, and God knows what sorrow I had
<pb n="206" /><anchor id="Pg206" />when I heard you had been to Venice. If you had found
me at Venice things would have been very different; but
enough. Now gossip mine, now that we have been through
fire and water, and experienced things one could never
have imagined, let us thank God for all things, and for the
little life that is left to us; at least, let us spend it in what
quiet we may. Verily, we must put no faith in fortune,
she is so perverse and sad. I am come to this; for aught
I care the universe may be ruined. I should laugh at
everything. Menichella will tell you by word of mouth
of my life and how I am. I do not as yet seem to myself
to be the same Bastiano that I was before the sack. I
cannot collect my thoughts. I say no more. Christ keep
you well.</p>

<p>"The 24th day of February, 1531, in Rome.</p>

<p>"About your coming here, according to what Master
Menichella tells me, it does not seem to be necessary, unless
you come for a jaunt or to put your house in order;
which, in truth, is going to the bad in more ways than
one, as in the roofs and other things. I suppose you know
that the workshop, with the carved marbles in, has tumbled
to pieces; it is a great pity. You will be able to remedy
this and make some arrangements. As for me I should
dearly love to enjoy your company for a while; truly I am
dying to see you. I am all impatience; but do as you
think best.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your very faithful gossip,</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sebastiano Lucianis</hi>.</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lord Michael Angelo de Bonarotis</hi>,</p>

<p>"Most rare Sculptor, in Florence."</p>
</quote>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image39" />
<figure rend="w65" url="images/image39.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>APOLLO</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NATIONAL MUSEUM, THE BARGELLO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission from the photograph by Sig. G. Brugi, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #39</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Sebastiano continued his good services to his friend
<pb n="207" /><anchor id="Pg207" />with regard to the Tomb of Julius all through 1531.
The course of events may be followed in his letters. The
Pope was interested, and always consulted, in the affair, and
most favourably disposed to Michael Angelo. All this
anxiety preyed upon the master and injured his health.
Paolo Mini, the father of Antonio, Michael Angelo's
assistant, wrote to Baccio Valori on September 29<note place="foot"><p>The letter is in Gaye, ii. 229.</p></note>:
"Michael Angelo will not live long unless some measures
are taken for his benefit. He works very hard, eats little
and poorly, and sleeps less. In fact, he is afflicted with
two kinds of disorder: the one in his head, the other in
his heart. Neither is incurable, since he has a robust constitution;
but, for the good of his head, he ought to be
restrained by our Lord the Pope from working through
the winter in the sacristy, the air of which is bad for him;<note place="foot"><p>Any one who has spent a winter day drawing there will confirm
Paolo in this statement.</p></note>
and for his heart, the best remedy would be if his Holiness
could accommodate matters with the Duke of Urbino."
On November 21 Clement addressed a brief to his sculptor,
whereby Buonarroti was ordered, under pain of excommunication,
to lay aside all work, except what was strictly
necessary for the Medician monuments, and to take better
care of his health. On the 26th Benvenuto Valpaio added
that his Holiness desired Michael Angelo to select some
workshop more convenient than the cold and cheerless
sacristy.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Sebastiano's letters during 1533 often refer to an
edition of some madrigals written by Michael Angelo and
set to music by Bartolomeo Tromboncino, Giacomo Arcadelt,
<pb n="208" /><anchor id="Pg208" />and Constanzo Festa.<note place="foot"><p>"Correspondants," pp. 108-112.</p></note> Gottif<note place="foot"><p>Vol. ii. pp. 89, 122.</p></note> publishes an essay by Leto
Puliti on this music with the score of three of the madrigals.
Many of Michael Angelo's poetical compositions may be
referred to this period of comparative inaction as to painting
and sculpture. All through his life he wrote sonnets
and poems when his other work did not proceed quickly.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>In 1535 Michael Angelo finally left Florence. His
father and his favourite brother were dead, and so he
left the shadow of the great Duomo, all Florentines love,
for ever. At Rome he dreamed a dream of another Dome,
that has given to that city the feature by which we know
it best, and to Romans a possession not less beloved than
Bruneleschi's gift to the Florentines.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image40" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image40.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE HEAD OF THE NIGHT</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY OF SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #40</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>When Michael Angelo left, the works at San Lorenzo
were all unfinished; the façade was not begun, the Sagrestia
Nuova, the ground plan of which is similar to Bruneleschi's
Sagrestia Vecchia, was left in the rough, and the
Library he designed to hold the priceless Medician manuscripts,
collected by Cosimo Pater Patriæ and Lorenzo the
Magnificent, now known as the "Biblioteca Laurenziana,"
was only begun. As Michael Angelo's designs and working
drawings were of the roughest description, and he usually
left a great deal to be settled after he had seen the effect
of the earlier part of his works, we cannot blame him
only for certain faults, such as, for instance, the awkward
approach to the Library. If he had completed the work
he very likely would have made an entrance from the
piazza, as roomy and convenient, as the curious staircase in
the corner of the cloister is awkward and cramped. It was
<pb n="209" /><anchor id="Pg209" />completed by Giorgio Vasari, whose letters to Michael
Angelo about this difficult work, and Michael Angelo's
chaotic replies, belong to a much later period. The curious
manner of cutting up the wall by pilasters and framed
spaces cannot properly be judged without the bronze bas-reliefs
that they were intended to contain. Considered as
a method of hanging or displaying a collection of works of
art they are admirable, and might well serve for the interior
decoration of a great museum. The vestibule, with its
curious stairway, large consoles, and green and white
colour, leaves an impression of power and eccentricity in
architecture like the effect of the serious caricatures of
Leonardo da Vinci in drawing. The buildings at San
Lorenzo should be regarded as the prentice work of the
architect of the Dome of St. Peter's. The decorations of
the Sagrestia Nuova, too, were left unfinished; the statues
of Day, Night, Morning, and Evening were left where he
had worked upon them, on the floor of the chapel. From
Vasari's letter to him of 1562, instigated by the Duke
Cosimo, who desired to complete the work according to
Michael Angelo's designs, asking for help and advice,<note place="foot"><p>In the Archivio Buonarroti, Codici xi. No. 765; Bottari, Lettere
Pittoriche, vol. iii. pp. 78-84; and Symonds, vol. ii. p. 25.</p></note>
we gather that Michael Angelo intended to have placed
statues in all the niches above the sepulchres, and in the
frames above the doors works of painting, stucco for the
arches, and painting to adorn the flat walls and semicircular
spaces of the chapel. Michael Angelo, on account
of his great age, was unable or unwilling to assist in the
work. The present sarcophagi cannot have been intended
to hold the allegorical figures in the way they do, for the
under surfaces of the statues do not fit the top of the
<pb n="210" /><anchor id="Pg210" />mouldings, and certainly the rough stones that project
over them, forming a base for the feet, must have been
intended to be supported by solid marble, and not to rest
uneasily on air. The sarcophagi are of a greyer marble
than the figures or than the panelling behind them. The
architectural ornament appears to be of three dates: First,
the niches and panels of the walls; second, the sarcophagi
and their supports; third, the doors of the chapel and
niches over them. In the first, the grotesque heads in the
mouldings are like the dull grotesques Michael Angelo
appears to have designed in the architecture of the Tomb
of Julius and on the armour of the captains in this chapel.
In the second, the four-horned skulls of rams on the sides
of the supports of the sarcophagi are very feeble and poor
in design. If we compare them with the powerful and true
drawing of the rams' heads used in the frame-work of the
vault of the Sistine Chapel, we shall see that it is impossible
for Michael Angelo to have designed them, or even
let them pass whilst he was superintending the works. The
shell and rope patterns are even worse and more feeble;
they are easily seen to be executed by different hands. The
simple bosses of the base under "Dawn and Evening" are
still unfinished: that would go to prove that Michael
Angelo had designed them and seen them cut as far as
they go&mdash;not necessarily that he had seen them in position&mdash;and
that the academicians, when they did their best to
complete the chapel, rightly decided to leave them as they
were. The base under Day and Night has no bosses;
they had not been begun as in the former case; we may
presume the academicians thought it best to have them
flat. These simple bases are the most effective portions
of the architectural scheme of the monument, in character
<pb n="211" /><anchor id="Pg211" />with the allegorical figures, reminding us of the plinths or
seats provided for the Athletes and the Prophets of the
Sistine. Perhaps they were the only portions, except the
figures and the panelling of the walls, seen by Michael
Angelo himself. The supports and lid of the sarcophagi,
and the sarcophagus of Giuliano, are of different marble to
the actual receptacle of the body of Lorenzo, that is under
Dawn and Evening. The quiet mouldings of the latter are
much finer and more in character with the walls. The lids
are of a white sugary marble, the mouldings coarse and
semicircular in section, and the volutes and circular
endings of the lids are of a perfectly stupid design. These
lids cannot have been seen by Michael Angelo; and, therefore,
he cannot have seen the figures in their places upon
them. The sarcophagus under the Day and Night has been
copied from the one seen by Michael Angelo: its mouldings
are still beautiful, but heavier, more deeply cut, and of less
subtle line in the section. The difference is perceptible to
the eye and evident with the aid of a good foot-rule.
This sarcophagus is of a different marble, as has been said.
As to the third period, the garlands and little pretty vases
over the doors of the chapel, and the consoles and niches
above, are like nothing else in the world but those carved
frames that in Florence to this day are called "Vasari
frames."</p>

<p>The marble candlesticks upon the altar of the chapel
are of different marble from the altar on which they stand,
and appear to be of an earlier date. The grotesques
on the bases are of good design, and the drill holes of the
marble cutting are simply left to tell their story of how
the work was done, instead of being cut away and hidden
as in later work. May they not have been designed in
<pb n="212" /><anchor id="Pg212" />Michael Angelo's time, possibly for the brackets on the
cornice of the panelling behind the tombs? On the altar
is the inscription:</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p rend="text-align: center">PAULUS V. PONT. MAX.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">MDCX.</p>
</quote>

<p>The figures of Giuliano and Lorenzo are perfectly
finished; they cannot be regarded as portraits, but as symbols.
The armour of the warrior Giuliano is magnificently
designed, and must have been founded upon some antique
example. The grotesque upon the breastplate is not unlike
a grotesque in a similar place upon an antique marble bust
in the Naples Museum. The helmeted Lorenzo, Il Penseroso,
broods over what might have been, had he acted his
part in Florence. Under his elbow rests a box of peculiar
design, possibly the representation of a political instrument
used in the offices of his family's unwise government.
The unfinished head of Day is an example of how the
master appears to complete his work from the first stroke
of his chisel. The vigorous giant, just rising to his work,
looks over his shoulder at the bright sun. The rough
chiselling of the face suggests already the dazzle of the
light in his eyes; how he tears his right hand as yet half
stone from out his stony breast! With his left hand
behind his back he appears to count the quattrini of his
wage; this action of the thumb placed on the second
finger is Michael Angelo's favourite one for the hand; it
may be seen many times in this chapel alone. The shortness
of the feet in the figure of Day appears to be due to
a miscalculation as to the size of the block; but, perhaps,
had the head and torso been thinned down in the finishing
<pb n="213" /><anchor id="Pg213" />they would have been correct in proportion. At the same
time, the feet are finished most carefully and beautifully,
and are so true that photographs of them look almost
like photographs from the finest of living models.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image41" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image41.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>NIGHT</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY OF SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #41</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>How much has been written about the Night and her
meanings! We have good proof that her maker intended
her to have some of these many meanings in the reply of
Michael Angelo to Giovan Battista Strozzi's complimentary
verses:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">La Notte, che tu vedi in si dolci atti</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Dormire, fu da un Angelo scolpita</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">In questo sasso, e perchè dorme ha vita;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Destala, se no'l credi, e parleratti.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">The Night, that thou seest, so sweetly sleeping,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Was by an angel carved in the rude stone,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Sleeping, she lives, if thou believ'st it not,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Wake her, and surely she will answer thee.</l>
</lg>

<p>The reply of Michael Angelo is in a much higher vein,
and teaches us to look to a far different aim in his work
than the mere form represented:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Grato m'è 'l sonno e più l'esser di sasso;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Mentre che 'l danno e la vergogna dura</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Non veder, non sentir m'è gran ventura;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Però non mi destar; deh! parla basso!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Dear is my sleep, more dear to be but stone;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Whilst deep despair and dark dishonour reign</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Not to hear, not to feel is greatest gain;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Then wake me not; speak in an undertone.</l>
</lg>

<p>No one ever before gave such tragic beauty to the worn
and tired figure of a woman who has lived through her
many days of toil and suffered many labours. It is
believed by a medical authority that the master meant
<pb n="214" /><anchor id="Pg214" />the statue to represent rest after a labour, but it is rather
the nightmare-troubled sleep of a tired woman, whose
beautiful firm hips and worn breasts prove her to have
bravely met and passed through many cares, and suckled
many children. A horrid mask, symbolising these memories,
in bad dreams, grimaces beside her left hand. The eyes
of the mask are cut double so that the thing alters its
glance as you move about the chapel, fascinates and is
intolerable. The noble and splendid thighs of the woman
again realise a favourite problem of Michael Angelo's. He
represented these powerful limbs in the Flood and other
parts of the Sistine vault, and in the Leda. Beneath is
seen an owl; never before in sculpture has a bird been
represented with such power and dignity, save only by the
Greeks in the eaglets head on the coin of Eiis. There are
wreaths of poppy heads, symbols of sleep, and a moon
and stars to crown the head that is like the head of a
greater than Diana.</p>

<p>Evening, a brawny, hard-worked man, looks across the
chapel with pity towards the Night. He appears to be in
the act of straightening and stretching out his limbs,
lately bent by the toils of the day, in longed-for rest.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image42" />
<figure rend="w75" url="images/image42.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE MADONNA AND CHILD</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NEW SACRISTY, SAN LORENZO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #42</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The virgin Dawn lifts her weary head, as it were, in
despair, that another day of shame and reproach is beginning;
her long, lithe limbs and narrow hips contrast with
the ample girth and muscular power of the Night. The
modelling of the torso of this figure is, perhaps, the finest
piece of workmanship in the chapel, and should be studied
from every point of view, even from the back of the monument.
The muscular forms and the disposition of the
lines are so beautiful and true that it is a veritable marvel
and wonder of the world. The right proportion of
<pb n="215" /><anchor id="Pg215" />development necessary for a figure of that colossal size to
move and live has never been so well calculated. The
head is so beautiful that it cannot be spoken about; but
must be seen in the position Michael Angelo designed it
for, and not tilted upright on an ordinary pedestal as it is
always seen in the art schools. All the four figures struggle
with the trials, difficulties, and despair of their lives, as
who should say, to such a pass has Medici rule reduced
existence in Florence.</p>

<p>One other statue in the Chapel is entirely by the hand
of the master, a Madonna suckling the child Jesus, a
strong boy straddling across her knee and turning right
round to reach the breast. Although unfinished, it is one
of Michael Angelo's noblest works; it is a notable example
of compactness of design, and of how he left the shape of
the block of marble evident in his finished work.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="216" /><anchor id="Pg216" /><head>CHAPTER IX</head>

<head type="sub">THE LAST ACT OF THE TRAGEDY OF THE TOMB,
AND THE DAY OF JUDGMENT</head>

<p>As soon as Michael Angelo arrived in Rome, in 1535,
he set to work to complete his contract for the Tomb
of Julius, and marbles that had waited in silence for his
liberating hand began to resound with the clink of the iron.
The two Slaves in the Louvre appear to have been worked
upon once again at this date, if we may judge by their
likeness to the work in the Dawn and the Day. After
the death of Clement the new Pope, Paul III., Farnese,
sent for him and requested him to enter his service, as
Condivi tells us.<note place="foot"><p>See p. 66.</p></note> Paul III., in a brief dated September 1,
1535,<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, ii. p. 123.</p></note> appointed Michael Angelo chief architect, sculptor,
and painter at the Vatican; he became a member of the
Pope's household, with a pension of 1200 golden crowns,
raised on the revenue from a ferry across the river Po, at
Piacenza. This was so unremunerative, however, that it
was exchanged for a post on the Chancery at Rimini. And
now the doors of the Sistine Chapel once more close upon
the master, not to be opened again until the Christmas of
1541.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image43" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image43.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE DAY OF JUDGMENT</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">(<hi rend="font-style: italic">From a print in the British Museum</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #43</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Michael Angelo had to destroy three frescoes by
Perugino and two lunettes of his own upon the altar
<pb n="217" /><anchor id="Pg217" />wall of the Sistine Chapel for his new scheme. He is said
to have had the wall rebuilt of well-baked bricks, so possibly
the old frescoes had suffered from damp and dirt. Vasari
says Fra Sebastiano del Piombo prepared the wall for
Michael Angelo, and secretly had it grounded for oil painting,
no doubt hoping himself to be employed in the work,
as oil was his special medium. Michael Angelo was very
wroth with his old friend for this, and declared that oil
painting was an art only fit for women and crazy fellows.
We hear of no further intercourse between Michael Angelo
and the jovial frate. Vasari attributes their coolness to
this incident.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Hieronimo Staccoli wrote a letter in July 1537,<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, ii. p. 125.</p></note>
to the Duke of Camerino, son and heir to the Duke of
Urbino, about a salt-cellar designed for him by Michael
Angelo. This prince was afterwards a good friend to the
master, and his letter of September 7, 1539, informs us of
the position of affairs with regard to the Tomb of Julius
during the progress of the large painting in the Sistine:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dearest Messer Michael Angelo</hi>,&mdash;It always has
been, and now is, more than ever our infinite desire, as
you will naturally imagine, to see the Tomb to the sainted
memory of Pope Julius, my uncle, brought to a good conclusion
by you, and we know well that it belongs to our
duty to have good care of it, and see it ultimately finished,
being held to it as you so well know by that sainted
spirit: nevertheless, having heard by letters from our
ambassador at Rome the great desire of our Lord, we
must comfort ourselves with all patience whilst this said
<pb n="218" /><anchor id="Pg218" />work is passed over by you. As long as His Holiness
holds you busy in finishing the picture in the said chapel
of Sisto; not being able or willing, but by our duty and
our natural inclination in this as in all things to otherwise
than comply with his wishes, we are contented to
agree with a good grace, on reflection and by the reverence
we bear to His Holiness. You may, therefore, fairly go
on with the painting until the work is finished; but with
a firm hope and belief that when it is done you will give
yourself up entirely to finishing the said Tomb, redoubling
your diligence and care to make up for the loss of time,
as His Holiness has also promised you shall, kindly offering
himself to urge you to do it; and to this end we
have written you this letter. So long a time has passed
since this said Tomb was begun that we cannot persuade
ourselves but that you are equally desirous with us to
see it finished; and esteeming you an honourable man,
as we certainly believe you are&mdash;you cannot be otherwise
with your singular virtue&mdash;we judge it superfluous to give
you any admonition except that you keep yourself in good
health, in order that you may honour those sainted bones
that living honoured you and the other gifted men of
that age, by all that we have so often heard. We beg you
will make use of us if there is any other matter in which
we can do you pleasure, for we shall do it with that
good will which your most rare gifts deserve. And keep
well."</p>
</quote>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image44" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image44.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE JUDGE. <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">from</hi> "THE DAY OF JUDGMENT"</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli, Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #44</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Shortly before the fresco was finished, Vasari informs
us that Michael Angelo had a bad fall from the scaffolding,
and injured his leg. He returned home, shut himself up
in his house, and would not allow any doctor to come near
<pb n="219" /><anchor id="Pg219" />him or even enter the house. A certain Florentine
physician and lover of the arts, Baccio Rontini, contrived
to creep in by a back door, and roamed about until he
found the master. He then insisted upon remaining with
him, looking after him until he had effected a complete
cure.</p>

<p>The Last Judgment was shown to the public upon
Christmas Day, 1541. In this picture of the Day of Wrath,
Michael Angelo has concentrated all his energies to represent
the terror of the wrath of God. It is Jehovah with
His thunders that rises before the frightened mass of human
souls. The Holy Mother crouches beside Him, turning
her face away so as not to see the wrath to come. Even
the saints look with dread towards the great Judge, fearing
lest they too should be condemned. Martyrs brandish the
emblems of their martyrdom before His eyes to plead for
them, and, as some have said, claim vengeance for their
pains. Michael Angelo would have us realise that no
human soul is innocent beside the Holiness of Heaven.
The gentle happiness of the redeemed, as represented by
the blessed Frate Angelico is absent from the scene&mdash;it
could not appear without destroying the unities of the
tragedy. Peace will follow as the blessed walk in the
Elysian fields after they have passed, with a fearful joy,
from the judgment seat. Michael Angelo has followed
the traditional composition of the subject in all its lines
and details, adapting it with the least change possible to
the space at his command, and to the superior knowledge
of the drawing of the human form that he possessed. It
is most interesting to compare this rendering with the
same subject in the Campo Santo at Pisa. Every part of
the composition is repeated, the action of the Judge, the
<pb n="220" /><anchor id="Pg220" />Madonna beside Him on His right, Apostles on either side,
the resurrection of the dead, the descent into hell, the
angels blowing the trumpets in the centre of the lower
part, the angels bearing the cross and other implements of
the Passion in the upper corners. This crowded mass of
figures is divided into nine several parts, all the figures and
groups having room enough to move, and to spare. The
more this work is studied in detail the more beautiful the
forms appear, and the more daring and skilful the foreshortenings
are found to be. Every figure is beautiful,
and every one of them noble. The picture is full of symbolism
in the details, and may be studied every day, and
new thoughts and new meanings found in it. Souls that
help each other in their upward struggle. Beads of prayers
with which one good righteous man draws souls to heaven.
The wife who lifts up her despairing husband; his expression
of awe and doubt as he rises upward. Souls long
separated by death rush together in close embrace; father
and son, husband and wife. Dante is there thirsting for
deepest mysteries, his face positively thrust between St.
Peter and St. Paul. Souls driven down to hell, beautiful
and noble as are those destined for heaven; even their
despair is dignified as if they assented to their doom as just.
Old Charon, in his boat, "with eyes of brass, who beats
the delaying souls with uplifted oar," is taken directly
from Dante:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Caron demonio con occhi di bragia</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Loro accenando, tutte le raccoglie,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Batte col remo qualunque si adagia.</l>
</lg>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image45" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image45.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>SPIRITS OF THE BLESSED, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">part of</hi> "THE DAY OF JUDGMENT"</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">SISTINE CHAPEL, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #45</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Those portions of the fresco in the semicircular spaces
at the top, angels bearing implements of the Passion,
appear to have been painted the last. They approximate
<pb n="221" /><anchor id="Pg221" />in style to the works afterwards done in the Pauline
Chapel, and are not so absolutely true in drawing as the
rest of the work. Here, for the first time, is a sense of
fatigue in the workmanship. They appear to have been
treated as two separate compositions filling their lunettes.
Michael Angelo has used the favourite device of Raphael
to give movement, direction, and force of line, two figures
pointing almost side by side in almost exactly parallel
actions. Nothing gives so much sense of rush, as may be
seen in many of the compositions in the Loggia. One
instance here is the angel bearing the Crown of Thorns and
the figure near him. Another is just below, two figures
near the right arm of the Judge. One of the finest and
most superb groups ever designed by Michael Angelo is
the group of angels blowing the trumpets of doom in the
forefront of the fresco. Their energy and power, compared
with the placid angels of Pisa and Orvieto, exhibit
the different aims of the artist most effectively. It must
be noticed how carefully Michael Angelo has arranged his
composition, so that the baldacchino used behind the High
Altar upon great occasions shall not injure his composition.
The group of angel trumpeters, the Charon and the devils
in a cave, are all hidden and cut off exactly by the curtains,
and the composition generally is positively improved by
their absence. Michael Angelo, no doubt, thought the
fresco would be most seen on such occasions, and designed
his work accordingly. The space hidden, however, he did
not neglect, but placed in it some of his finest work.</p>

<p>The prophet above this end of the chapel is Jonah,
whose history is a symbol of the resurrection of the dead.
His presence there makes us suppose that Michael Angelo
always contemplated the possibility of his having to paint
<pb n="222" /><anchor id="Pg222" />the Last Judgment upon this wall, although he himself
painted the lunettes now covered by the larger composition.
The colour of this fresco is very much darkened by
dust and by smoke from the altar candles; and, as it is
more within reach than the vault, it has been retouched.
It should be a source of comfort to those who get tired
with looking upward at pictures in high places, if they will
but remember that their beloved paintings have often been
protected from the restorer by their high position. There
is an interesting early copy of this fresco in the Corsini
Gallery in Florence, which, though rather crude, gives us
a good idea of the light tone of the painting in its early
state.</p>

<p>This work was received by artists with enthusiasm,
reflected in the pages of Vasari. They came from all
parts to study it; in fact, most of the drawings attributed
to Michael Angelo in collections are their studies from it,
and not his studies for it, as they are called. As a general
rule, whenever there are two or more figures drawn in a
group, all equally finished and accurately in the same
position as the figures in the fresco, the drawing may be
assumed to be a copy.</p>

<p>Two sections of the public, even then, were unable to
receive Michael Angelo's message of the beauty and purity
of the human figure. Not only scandalous persons, like
Aretino, objected to them, but pious people, who could
not and cannot yet be brought to believe in the splendour
and holiness of the Creator's work. Vasari tells us that
when Michael Angelo had almost finished the work Pope
Paul came to see it, and Messer Biagio da Cesena, Master
of the Ceremonies, a very particular person, was with him
in the chapel, and was asked what he thought of it.
<pb n="223" /><anchor id="Pg223" />Messer Biagio da Cesena replied that he considered it
highly improper to paint so many shameless, naked figures
in such an honourable building, and that it was not a fit
work for the Pope's chapel, but more suitable to a bagno
or an inn. Michael Angelo nettled by this resolved to
revenge himself at once. As soon as they left the chapel
he set to work and drew Messer Biagio's portrait, from
memory, in hell as Minos, with a great serpent twisted
round his legs, surrounded by a crowd of devils. Messer
Biagio complained to the Pope, who asked him where he
was placed? "In hell," was the reply. "Then I can do
nothing to help you," said the Pope; "had the painter
sent you to purgatory I would have used my best efforts
to get you released, but I exercise no influence in hell, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ubi
nulla est redemptio</hi>." Some years afterwards Paul IV.
objected to the naked figures, and employed Daniele da
Volterra to patch draperies on to some of them, with
Michael Angelo's consent, whereby Daniele obtained the
nickname of Il Braghettone, or the breeches-maker.
Daniele did his work with a good deal of discretion,
hiding as little of the original fresco as possible: the
additions are unfortunately offensive in colour. The early
engravings show the picture in its original state, and show
that the additions are not so many or so important as
might be supposed, as most of the larger masses of draperies
are seen to be Michael Angelo's own work. When the
Pope obtained Michael Angelo's consent to this alteration,
the artist replied to his messenger: "Tell his Holiness this
is a small matter, and can easily be set right. Let him
look to setting the world in order: to reform a picture
costs no great trouble." Pius V. also employed Girolamo
da Fano to make some further alterations. These retouches
<pb n="224" /><anchor id="Pg224" /><hi rend="font-style: italic">a secco</hi> have destroyed to a great extent the atmospheric
quality and the relation of the planes in Michael Angelo's
suave true-fresco method, which, as may be seen in the
vault, gives the grey half-tints of the flesh-tones in a way
only equalled by Andrea del Sarto in fresco and Rembrandt
in oil painting.</p>

<p>As soon as Michael Angelo had finished the Last
Judgment, Paul III. set him to work again to fresco the
walls of the chapel of the Holy Sacrament, just completed
by Antonio da San Gallo, and now known as the Cappella
Paolina. Michael Angelo had hoped to complete the
Tomb of Julius at once, with his own hand, but the
Pope's determination necessitated further negotiations
with the Duke of Urbino. The Duke wrote to Michael
Angelo upon March 6, 1542, saying that he would be
quite satisfied if the three statues by his hand, including
the Moses, were assigned to the Tomb, the execution of
the rest being left to competent workmen under him.<note place="foot"><p>See Gaye, iv. 289-309, and "Lettere," &amp;c., pp. 709-712.</p></note></p>

<p>There is also a petition from Michael Angelo to
Paul III.<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. cdxxxiii., dated July 20.</p></note> stating that his Holiness the Pope's commission
for Michael Angelo to work and paint in his new chapel
prevents him finishing the Tomb as agreed with the illustrious
signor Duke of Urbino. "Already Raffaello da
Monte Lupo, the Florentine, considered one of the best
masters of the time, was well forward with the standing
group of the Madonna with the Child in her arms, and a
Prophet and a Sibyl seated, for four hundred scudi. The
rest of the decoration, excepting the part in front, was in
the hands of Master Giovanni de' Marchesi and Francesco da
Urbino, chisellers and carvers in stone, for seven hundred
<pb n="225" /><anchor id="Pg225" />scudi. But there still remained to be supplied the three
figures to be carved by Michael Angelo's own hand, that is
to say, a Moses and two captives. But as the two said
captives were designed for the work when it was to have
been on a much larger scale, they would not fit in the
reduced design, nor could they in any way be made to look
well there. Accordingly the said Messer Michael Angelo,
not to lose his honour, had blocked out two new statues to
go on either side of the Moses, representing the Active and
Contemplative Life, which are well advanced, so that they
may be easily finished by another master. Michael Angelo
desires and supplicates his Holiness our Lord the Pope
Paul the Third, in order that he may work in his chapel,
which needs all his energies and his entire care, and he being
aged, and desiring to serve the Pope with all his power, to
free him from his obligation to the signor Duke of Urbino
with regard to the said Tomb, cancelling and annulling
every obligation. Especially, to allow him to hand over
the two statues that remain to be done to the said
Raffaello da Montelupo, or to some one pleasing to his
Excellency, for a good price, which it is thought would be
200 scudi. The Moses will be finished entirely by Michael
Angelo, and arrangements will be made by Michael Angelo
to pay the money due for these workers ... and so he will
be free in all things and able to serve and satisfy his Holiness."
Finally, he deposits a sum of 1200 crowns, and
guarantees that the work shall be efficiently executed in all
its details. The final contract in agreement with this
petition was signed upon August 20, 1542.<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, p. 715.</p></note></p>

<p>The mighty design of Michael Angelo's early years of
enthusiasm dwindled down to the Moses, but what a height
<pb n="226" /><anchor id="Pg226" />above other men's biggest designs is this single figure! The
Cardinal was right who said the statue of Moses alone
was a sufficient memorial of Julius. In a letter to Salvestro
da Montauto, of February 3, 1545<note place="foot"><p>Lettere, No. cdxlv. p. 505 (in the "Biblioteca Nazionale,"
Florence.)</p></note>, Michael Angelo says
that the Duke of Urbino ratified the deed, and the five
statues were given to Raffaello da Montelupo to be carved.
"Of these five statues my Lord the Pope having at my
earnest prayer and for my satisfaction conceded to me a
little time, I finished two of them with my own hand, that
is to say, the Contemplative Life and the Active Life for the
same sum that the said Raffaello was to have had." From
the works themselves we may be sure that there is a good
deal of Raffaello da Montelupo about these figures all the
same. Notwithstanding all this evidence of the desire of
Michael Angelo to carry out his contract, we have a letter<note place="foot"><p>Bottari, Lett. pitt. iii. 796.</p></note>
from Annibale Caro to Antonio Gallo as late as 1553
entreating him to plead with the Duke of Urbino for
Michael Angelo. "I assure you that the extreme distress
caused him by being in disgrace with his Excellency is
sufficient to bring his grey hair with sorrow to the grave
before his time."</p>

<p>In the finished work there are statues not yet accounted
for, that is to say, the recumbent portrait of the Pope
which was executed by Maso del Bosco, the coat of arms
of the Della Rovere by Battista Benti of Pietra Santa, and
the terminal figures by Giacomo del Duca. The greatest
drawback to the effect of the whole is the change in the
architectural treatment and decorations. The lower part
belongs to the period when the work was begun in 1505,
<pb n="227" /><anchor id="Pg227" />and the upper, with no transition but a joint in the stone,
to the heavier and coarser style of the period when it was
finished, 1545. The jointing and the masonry generally
are not of a satisfactory character,<note place="foot"><p>Heath Wilson, p. 449.</p></note> and Michael Angelo's
assistants cannot be congratulated upon the way they did
their share of the work. With the exception of the
figures of Active and Contemplative Life, the work of the
assistants would be better away.</p>

<p>The two bound captives which were too big for the
altered monument are now the glory of the Italian sculpture
galleries of the Louvre. They were presented by
Michael Angelo to Roberto degli Strozzi, because, when
the sculptor was ill in 1544, Luigi del Riccio, his friend,
nursed him and looked after him in the Strozzi Palace.
They were taken to France and offered to the King of
France, who gave them to the Connétable de Montmorenci;
they were placed by him in Ecouen. They were bought
for the French nation by M. Lenoir when the Republic
put them up for sale in 1793.</p>

<p>Four unfinished colossal figures, which still appear to
be wrenching themselves from their prison of stone, now
lurk in the corners of a repulsive grotto in the Boboli
Gardens. They are supposed to have been also for the
Tomb of Julius. Heath Wilson suggests that they may
have been intended for the façade of San Lorenzo. The
difficulty as to scale that caused a doubt as to their being
intended for the Tomb does not really disprove it; for
Michael Angelo was never very particular as to the comparative
size of the figures in his monuments, and the
many alterations of his schemes for the Tomb make it
possible for them to have been worked in somehow. It is
<pb n="228" /><anchor id="Pg228" />very probable that when he was at Florence, and after
some of the more threatening letters of the executors, he
set savagely to work upon some blocks ready to his hand,
with the idea of having them conveyed to Rome afterwards.
They belong to about the time of the siege of
Florence, and are more suggestive of his method of work,
and of his thoughts in the presence of the stone, than any
other of his statues. If they were removed from their ugly
surroundings and placed, say, in the Tribuna of David in
the Belle Arti at Florence instead of the plaster casts that
represent the master in his own city, they, with the
other fragments, such as the Saint Matthew, the Apollo,
the Victory, and the other works in the Bargello, would
make a gallery of his art even worthy of Michael Angelo.
Failing such a possibility, they might, at least, be placed
under the Loggia dei Lanzi, away from the repulsive
grotesque of stucco and stalactite that grins at them in the
grotto. If something must be left as a companion to the
ugly thing, plaster casts would be quite good enough.</p>

<p>The Victory, of the Bargello, was said by Vasari to have
been designed for the Tomb, but it may just as well have been
intended for an angel overcoming a demon, part of the ruined
scheme for the façade of San Lorenzo. The lower figure is
still left in the rough, and is supposed to be like the artist.
The head of the upper figure is so dull that it cannot have
been carved by the sculptor who finished the torso so
exquisitely. It may have been left a mere block, like the
head of one of the captives of the Boboli. The man who
carved the head, and also worked on other portions of the
group, turned the neck round too much. If we imagine the
head less turned and looking down towards the crouching
figure, conquered by the young genius of beauty and
<pb n="229" /><anchor id="Pg229" />victory, we shall see the grace in the pose of the torso to
greater advantage. We imagine a somewhat similar story
for the figure in the Bargello, called the Adonis. The boar
cannot be by Michael Angelo's hand, and, indeed, very
little of the figure suggests his grasp of plastic possibilities;
the figure cannot have been much more than blocked out
by him, and was finished after his death by some artist of
the type of Vincenzio Danti.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="230" /><anchor id="Pg230" /><head>CHAPTER X</head>

<head type="sub">THE CHAPEL OF POPE PAUL, AND THE PIETÀ OF
SANTA MARIA DEL FIORE</head>

<p>Michael Angelo wrote a number of sonnets and made
many drawings for his friends, especially for the Marchioness
of Pescara and Messer Tomaso dei Cavalieri, a
noble Roman gentleman. For him they were generally
subjects from Greek and Roman mythology, but for the
Marchioness the drawings always represented episodes from
the story of the Passion of our Lord. A Pietà, drawn
for this lady, was engraved by Giulio Bonasoni and Tudius
Bononiensis in 1546. There are several drawings in the
Print Room of the British Museum and the Windsor and
Oxford Collections of this character and period. One at
Oxford was probably the original sent to Vittoria, but
all are of the same sacred inspiration; in fact, the
religious element becomes very strong indeed in all his
later work, just as in the later work of Titian. These
artists had the near prospect of death in view, and thus
they turned their thoughts entirely to work from which
they hoped for reward in the world to come. The fear
of hell was not without its influence upon both of them.</p>

<p>Some of the drawings made by Michael Angelo for
his friend, Tomaso Cavalieri, are mentioned in one of
Tomaso's letters, dated 1533.<note place="foot"><p>Archivio Buonarroti, Cod. vii.</p></note></p>

<pb n="231" /><anchor id="Pg231" />

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image46" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image46.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE CRUCIFIXION OF SAINT PETER</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE CHAPEL OF POPE PAUL, THE VATICAN, ROME<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #46</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Unique my Lord</hi>,&mdash;Some days ago I received a
letter from you, which was very welcome, both because
I learned by it that you are well, and also because I can
now be sure that you will soon return. I was very sorry
not to answer at once. However, when you know the
cause, you will hold me excused. On the day your letter
reached me I was very sick, and in such a high fever that
I was at the point of death; and verily I should have
died if it had not revived me. Since then, thank God,
I have been well. Messer Bartolomei has now brought me
a sonnet by you, which has made it my duty to write.
Some three days since I received my drawing of Phæton,
which is exceedingly well done. The Pope, the Cardinal
de' Medici, and every one, have seen it. I do not know
what made them want to do so. The Cardinal expressed
a wish to inspect all your drawings, and they pleased him
so much that he said he should like to have a Tityos and
Ganymede done in crystal. I could not prevent him from
using the Tityos, and it is now being executed by Master
Giovanni. I struggled hard to save the Ganymede. The
other day I went, as you requested, to Fra Sebastiano. He
sends a thousand messages, but all to pray you to come
back.</p>

<p>"Your affectionate,</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Thomas Cavalieri</hi>."</p>
</quote>

<p>Messer Tomaso feared the drawings would be damaged
in the workshop of the gem engraver. There are several
of these drawings in existence in good condition, with no
marks of the thumbs of workmen about them.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>From the letters referring to the last contract about
the Tomb of Julius, we learn that the frescoes in the
<pb n="232" /><anchor id="Pg232" />Cappella Paolina were not begun in October 1542.
Michael Angelo worked at them with slight interruptions
for seven years; they represent the Conversion of Saint
Paul and the Martyrdom of Saint Peter. They are very
highly finished in execution and studied in grace of composition,
but frigid, and too evidently the work of an old
man. The skill of the drawing and foreshortening is
masterly as ever, but he does not appear to have referred
to nature for the forms; and even Michael Angelo without
nature became stale. Vasari says, after describing the
frescoes without his customary enthusiasm, "They were his
last productions in painting. He was seventy-five years old
when he carried them to completion; and, as he informed
me, he did so with great effort and fatigue&mdash;painting, after
a certain age, and especially fresco painting, not being in
truth fit work for old men."</p>

<p>In the spring of 1546 Francis I. of France wrote to
Michael Angelo asking for some fine monument by his
hand, and copies of the Pietà della Febbre, now in St.
Peter's, and of the Christ holding the Cross, in Santa
Maria Sopra Minerva, for his chapel. A draft of Michael
Angelo's reply runs:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image47" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image47.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE CONVERSION OF SAINT PAUL</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE CHAPEL OF POPE PAUL<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #47</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To the most Christian King of France.</hi><note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlix. p. 519 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sacred Majesty</hi>,&mdash;I do not know which is the greater,
the grace or the wonder at it, that your Majesty should
have deigned to write to a man like me, and still more to
ask him for things of his, unworthy even of the name of
your Majesty; but, whatever they are, let your Majesty
understand that for a long time I have desired to serve
you in them; but, not having had the opportunity,
<pb n="233" /><anchor id="Pg233" />because you have not been in Italy where my work is, I
have not been able to do it. Now I am old, and have
been occupied these many months with the work for Pope
Paul. But if a little life is still left me after all these
occupations, what I have desired is, as I have said, a little
time to work for your Majesty at my art&mdash;one work to be
in marble, one in bronze, and one in painting. And if
death hinders me from carrying out my wish, and if it be
possible to carve statues or to paint in the other life, I
shall not fail to do so there, where there is no more growing
old. And I pray God that He grant your Majesty a long
and happy life.</p>

<p>"From Rome, the day XXVI. of April, MDXLVI."</p>
</quote>

<p>In the letters and poems of this period we note the
endeavour to attain to a style in literature full of rich
conceits and elaborate compliment, which may be compared
to the style, elaborate and ornamental, but somewhat
cold and unattractive, of the frescoes in the Cappella
Paolina. As he grew older he devoted himself more
entirely to architecture and literature. The arts of sculpture
and painting, as exercised by him, could not be
carried on by assistants; he now perforce had to employ
himself upon work in which the execution could be left to
younger hands. He sought the help of scholars to overhaul
and set to rights his poems, sonnets, and thoughts in
words, as the masons and master-builders expressed his
thoughts in architecture&mdash;the Dome of St. Peter's, and the
cornice of the Farnese Palace. In the devotional drawings
we have mentioned, and an unfinished group in sculpture,
the Deposition from the Cross, now behind the High
Altar of Santa Maria del Fiore at Florence, we have the
<pb n="234" /><anchor id="Pg234" />only further manifestation of Michael Angelo's genius in
his favourite arts. Many of these drawings appear to be
designs for a great picture of the Crucifixion. He went
on executing them long after the death of the Marchioness
of Pescara, who first seems to have incited him to this
work. It almost appears to have become a religious exercise
with him; they have the same meaning as these last lines
of a Sonnet.</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nè pinger nè scolpir fia più che quieti</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">L' anima volta a quell' Amor divino</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Ch' aperse, a prender noi, in croce le braccia.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Painting nor sculpture now can lull to rest</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">My soul, that turns to His great love on high,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Whose arms to clasp us on the Cross were spread.<note place="foot"><p>"The Sonnets of Michael Angelo." By J.A. Symonds. No. lxv.</p></note></l>
</lg>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image48" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image48.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>THE PIETÀ OF SANTA MARIA DEL FIORE</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #48</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The marble group of the Deposition is so religious in
character that it can be compared with no work of art
executed since Michael Angelo's own early work the Pietà,
in St. Peter's, the Madonna della Febbre. Both for its
earnestness and its noble religious sentiment it is an act of
worship to look at it, and the days and nights spent in
its execution must have been periods of the heartiest
religious devotion and sorrowing love. The old sculptor
intended this work to have been his monument. The
unfinished head of Nicodemus, who sustains the body of
his dear Lord, is his own portrait, and, unfinished as it is,
expresses the deepest devotion and sadness. Vasari saw
this work in progress, and gives us a glimpse into the
home-life of the aged worker, who was never content out
of his workshop, and spent his sleepless nights working at
this huge marble with a paper cap on his head, in which
he stuck a lighted candle to see by. The solitary figure of
<pb n="235" /><anchor id="Pg235" />the old man in the vast and dimly lighted studio, groping
round the inchoate marble; the stillness of the night,
broken only by the sharp click of the mallet and the
grating of the chisel, is a picture of many of the bravest
hours of his old age. Vasari, observing all this, and
wishing to do the revered artist a kindness, sent him
40 lbs. of candles made of goat's fat, knowing that they
gutter less than ordinary dips of tallow. His servant
carried them politely to the house two hours after night-fall,
and presented them to Michael Angelo. He refused,
and said he did not want them. The man answered: "Sir,
they have almost broken my back carrying them all this
long way from the bridge, and I will not carry them home
again. There is a heap of mud opposite your door, thick
and firm enough to hold them upright. Here then will I
set them all up, and light them." When Michael Angelo
heard this he gave way: "Lay them down; I do not mean
you to play pranks at my house door." Vasari tells
another anecdote about the Deposition. Pope Julius III.
sent him late one evening to Michael Angelo's house for
a certain drawing. The aged master came down with
a lantern, and, hearing what was wanted, told Urbino
to look for the design. Meanwhile, Vasari turned his
attention to one of the legs of the Christ, which Michael
Angelo had been altering. In order to prevent his seeing
it Michael Angelo let the light fall, and they remained in
darkness. He then called for another light, and stepped forth
from the screen of planks behind which he worked, saying:
"I am so old that oftentimes Death plucks me by the cape
to go with him, and one day this body of mine will fall like
the lantern, and the light of life will be put out."</p>

<p>"If life gives us pleasure we ought not to expect displeasure
<pb n="236" /><anchor id="Pg236" />from death, seeing it is made by the hand of the
same master," was a favourite reflection of Michael Angelo's
upon mortality. This Deposition was never completed,
flaws appeared in the marble, and perhaps whilst working
in the imperfect light Michael Angelo's impatient chisel
cut too deep. He began to break up the work, but luckily
his servant Antonio, successor to Urbino, begged the fragments
from his master. Francesco Bandini, a Florentine
exile settled in Rome, wished for a work by the master,
and, with Michael Angelo's consent, bought it from Antonio
for two hundred crowns. It was patched up, but apparently
not worked upon, and remained in the garden of
Bandini's heir at Monte Cavallo. It was afterwards taken
to Florence and was finally placed in the Duomo in 1722
by the Grand Duke Cosimo III., where it may now be seen
behind the high altar, well-placed, so that the great cross
of the altar looks like the tree from which the body has
just been lowered. So well does the line of the cross behind
cut the group that we cannot help imagining that the
artist intended some such erection to have been placed
behind his figures. Those who would see this group aright
must visit the Duomo before seven o'clock on a summer
morning, when the light of the sun falls, though the white
robe of a bishop in one of the high eastern windows, upon
the neighbouring pillars and the floor, and lights up that
end of the church; at other times the darkness of the
dome covers the group as the darkness covered the earth
during the tragic hours at Golgotha.</p>

<p>The right arm of the Christ has become over polished and
much worn because it is used as a balustrade by the acolytes,
who carelessly run up and down the steps between the group
and the back of the high altar to light the candles during
<pb n="237" /><anchor id="Pg237" />service. On the other side a rough metal handle has positively
been let into the left side of the Joseph of Arimathea,
so that a clumsy boy may climb the more easily; wooden
steps also fit so closely to the marble that they injure
the lines of the group. All the characteristics of Michael
Angelo's impassioned period may be studied in this group;
his favourite mannerisms are there also. Examine the hand
of Joseph, with the middle finger touching the thumb,
and compare it with the allegorical statues of the Medici
Chapel. Vasari tells us that Michael Angelo began
another Pietà on a smaller scale; this may be the beautiful
group that has been spoiled by an alteration, now in the
courtyard of the Palazzo Rondini, No. 418, the Corso,
Rome. There is a cast of it in the Belle Arti at
Florence. The hanging limbs of the Christ have a most
pathetic effect, and so has the whole expression of the
group. The effect is obtained by the length of the principal
lines.</p>

<p>There is a medallion of the Madonna clasping her
dead son at the Albergo dei Poveri, at Genoa, attributed
to Michael Angelo; it may have been begun by him
during this long period of old age, but it cannot be called
his work. It has been entirely recarved by an imitator.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Michael Angelo made his famous report condemning
the design of Antonio da Sangallo for the rebuilding
of the Farnese palace upon the shores of the Tiber;
it is a mysterious document, in Michael Angelo's own
hand, and does not leave Sangallo a single merit. All
the theories are proved by the precepts of Vitruvius. The
adherents of Sangallo resented it very naturally, and the
"Setta Sangallesca" became his bitter enemies. The Pope
<pb n="238" /><anchor id="Pg238" />himself was dissatisfied with Sangallo, and the design for
the cornice was thrown open to competition. Perino del
Vaga, Sebastiano del Piombo, Giorgio Vasari, and Michael
Angelo all competed. Michael Angelo's design was
eventually carried out after he had placed a wooden
model of part of his cornice in position. Vasari, who
is the best authority upon this period of the life of
Michael Angelo, attributes to him also the exterior of the
palace from the second story upwards, and the whole of
the central courtyard above the first story, "making it the
finest thing of its sort in Europe." Michael Angelo had
also a serious disagreement with Sangallo before the
military committee fortifying the Borgo for the Pope.</p>

<p>When Antonio da Sangallo died at Terni on October 3,
1546, Michael Angelo succeeded to his post in Rome,
architect-in-general to the Pope, the principal work was,
of course, the great Church of St. Peter's. Bramante,
Raphael, and Peruzzi had all been architects-in-chief, and
many were the alterations in the plans. Notwithstanding
their differences during his early life, the design of
Bramante was the one that commended itself to Michael
Angelo; he abandoned Sangallo's design; the model for it
still exists and we cannot wonder at Michael Angelo's
decision. His criticisms are given in a letter supposed to
be to Bartolomeo Amanati.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlxxiv. p. 535, written in 1555 (in the Archivio
Buonarroti).</p></note> "It cannot be denied that
Bramante was a brave architect, equal to any one from the
times of the ancients until now. He laid the first plan of
Saint Peter's, not confused, but clear and simple, full of
light and detached from surrounding buildings, so as not
to injure any part of the palace. It was considered a fine
<pb n="239" /><anchor id="Pg239" />thing, and, indeed, it is still manifest that it was so; and
all the architects who have departed from the plan of
Bramante, as Sangallo has done, have departed from the
truth. And so it is, and all who have not prejudiced eyes
can see it in his model. He, with his outer circle of chapels,
in the first place takes all the light from the plan of
Bramante; and not only this, but he has not provided
any other means of lighting, and there are so many lurking
places, both above and below, all dark, which would be
very convenient for innumerable knaveries, a secure hiding-place
for bandits, false coiners, and all sorts of ribaldry,
and when it was shut up at night twenty-five men would
be needed to clear the building of those in hiding there,
and it would be difficult enough to find them. There is
yet another inconvenience: the circle of buildings with
their adjuncts outside added to Bramante's plan would
make it necessary to pull down to the ground the Capella
Paolina, the offices of the Piombo and the Ruota, and
more besides; nay, even the Sistine Chapel would, I believe,
not escape." May it not have been that this malicious
arrangement of Sangailo's to destroy Michael Angelo's
masterpieces made the great artist so bitter against him.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Paul III. conferred the post of architect-in-chief
at St. Peter's upon Michael Angelo on January 1, 1547,
"commissary, prefect, surveyor of the works, and architect,
with full authority to change the model, form,
and structure of the church at pleasure, and to dismiss
and remove the workmen and foremen employed upon
the same." For all this work Michael Angelo refused
payment, declaring that he meant to labour, without
recompense, for the love of God and the reverence he felt
<pb n="240" /><anchor id="Pg240" />for the Prince of the Apostles. Speaking broadly, the
former architects had designed ground plans of St. Peter's
on two lines, the Greek and the Latin crosses. Bramante,
and Baldassare Peruzzi used the Greek cross; Raphael,
the Basilica form, the addition of a long nave made
the plan like a Latin cross; and Sangallo, by adding
a huge portico to Peruzzi's design, made his ground
plan a Latin cross. Michael Angelo followed the lines of
Bramante, the Greek cross, designed so that the cupola
should be the dominant note of the building and its
principal feature, whether from within or without, and
from whichever side the building was approached.
Michael Angelo's intention may be realised at the back
of the present building, and his work best judged as one
walks round the great mass of masonry to the old entrance
to the Sculpture Galleries of the Vatican. Those who
approach Rome in the best way at present open to the
newcomer, by the light railway line from Viterbo, get a
magnificent view of the cupola, apparently rising out of a
green hillside, just before they enter the Eternal City, and
then, on their way to the Trastevere station, they pass
behind the building and get their first impression of St.
Peter's from Michael Angelo's own work.<note place="foot"><p>If the traveller has no luggage, or has sent it on before, he can
walk from the Trastevere station, past the Ponte Rotto, past the
Temple of Janus to the Forum, and see Rome for the first time so.</p></note></p>

<p>Michael Angelo began his work by pulling down much
of Sangallo's construction, and by severely repressing all
sorts of jobbery in connection with the supply of materials.</p>

<p>Michael Angelo states in a letter to Cardinal Ridolfo
Pio of Carpi,<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdxc., under date 1560, p. 554 (in the Archivio
Buonarroti).</p></note> that the study of the nude human figure is
<pb n="241" /><anchor id="Pg241" />necessary to an architect. If he had also stated that it
was an essential to all art workers, many good judges
would have agreed with him.</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Most Reverend Monsignor</hi>,&mdash;When a plan has
divers parts all those which are of one type in quality
and quantity have to be decorated in the same fashion
and in the same style, and similarly their counterparts.
But when the plan changes form altogether it is not
only allowable but necessary to change the said adornments
and likewise their counterparts. The intermediate
parts are always as free as you like, just as the nose,
which stands in the middle of the face, is not obliged
to correspond with either of the eyes; but one hand is
obliged to be like the other, and one eye must be as its
fellow, because they balance each other. Therefore it is
very certain that the members of architecture depend
upon the members of man. Who has not been, or is not
a good master of the figure, and especially of anatomy,
cannot understand it.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo Buonarroti.</hi>"</p>
</quote>

<p>Vasari tells us "that the Pope approved of Michael
Angelo's model, which reduced the cathedral to smaller
dimensions, but also to a more essential greatness. He
discovered that four of the principal piers, erected by
Bramante and left standing by Antonio da Sangallo, which
had to bear the weight of the tribune, were feeble. These
he fortified in part, constructing a winding staircase at the
side with gently sloping steps, up which beasts of burden
ascend with building material, and one can ride on horseback
to the level above the arches. He carried the first
cornice, made of travertine, round the arches&mdash;a wonderful
<pb n="242" /><anchor id="Pg242" />piece of work, full of grace, and very different from
the others. Nor could anything be better done in its
kind. He began the two great apses of the transept; and
whereas Bramante, Raffaello, and Peruzzi had designed
eight tabernacles toward the Campo Santo, which arrangement
Sangallo adhered to, he reduced them to three, with
three chapels inside."</p>

<p>The sect of Sangallo, headed by Nanni di Baccio
Bigio, continued to annoy and conspire against the aged
architect, and though Michael Angelo brought their
machinations to the notice of the Superintendent of the
Fabric in 1547,<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. 309.</p></note> he could not get his chief enemy dismissed.</p>

<p>The master's good friend, Pope Paul III., died in 1549.
Michael Angelo wrote of him to his nephew<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. ccxxxi. (December 21st), p. 260 (in the British
Museum).</p></note>: "It is
true that I have suffered great sorrow and not less loss by
the Pope's death, because I have received benefits from
his Holiness, and hoped for even more. God's will be
done. We must have patience. His death was beautiful,
fully conscious to the last word. God have mercy on his
soul." His successor, Julius III., was also friendly to
Michael Angelo, who spoke of him in a letter to his old
friend, Giovan Francesco Fattucci, at Florence.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlxvi. (October 1549), p. 527 (in the Archivio
Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giovan Francesco Fattucci</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">priest of Santa
Maria del Fiore, My most dear friend at Florence.</hi></p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giovan Francesco</hi>,&mdash;Dear friend, although
for many months we have not written to each other, yet I
<pb n="243" /><anchor id="Pg243" />have not forgotten our long and faithful friendship, and
wish you well, as I have always done, and love you with all
my heart and more, for the endless kindnesses I have
received. As regards old age, which is upon us both alike,
I should much like to know how yours treats you, for mine
does not content me greatly, so I beg you will write something
to me. You know how that we have a new Pope,
and who he is. All Rome rejoices, thanks be to God, and
expects nothing but the greatest benefit to all, especially
to the poor, on account of his liberality...."</p>
</quote>

<p>Efforts were made to dislodge Michael Angelo from
his post of architect to St. Peter's. A memorial of grievances<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. 311.</p></note>
was drawn up by the Superintendent and set before
the Pope, stating that Michael Angelo was "carrying on
with a high hand, and letting them know nothing of the
work, so that they do not like his ways, especially in
what he keeps pulling down. The demolition has been,
and to-day is, so great that all who witness it are moved
to pity." Michael Angelo evidently satisfied the Pope,
for he was confirmed in his office with even greater powers
than before.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Another plot ripened in 1557, and is excellently
described by Vasari:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"It was some little while before the beginning of
1551, when Vasari, on his return from Florence to Rome,
found the sect of Sangallo plotting against Michael
Angelo. They induced the Pope to hold a meeting in
Saint Peter's, where all the overseers and workmen connected
with the building should attend, and his Holiness
<pb n="244" /><anchor id="Pg244" />should be persuaded by false insinuations that Michael
Angelo had spoiled the fabric. He had already walled
in the apse of the King where the three chapels are, and
carried out the three upper windows. But it was not
known what he meant to do with the vault. They
then, misled by their shallow judgment, made Cardinal
Salviati, the elder, and Marcello Cervini, who was afterwards
Pope, believe that Saint Peter's would be badly
lighted. When all were assembled the Pope told Michael
Angelo that the deputies were of opinion the apse would
have but little light. He answered, 'I should like to hear
these deputies speak.' The Cardinal Marcello rejoined:
'We are here.' Michael Angelo then remarked: 'My
lord, above these three windows there will be other three
in the vault, which is to be built of travertine.' 'You
never told us anything about this,' said the Cardinal.
Michael Angelo responded: 'I am not, nor do I mean to
be, obliged to tell your lordships, or anybody else, what I
ought or wish to do. It is your business to provide the
money, and to see that it is not stolen. As regards the
plans of the building, you have to leave them to me.'
Then he turned to the Pope and said: 'Holy Father, behold
what gains are mine! Unless the hardships I endure
are beneficial to my soul, I lose my time and my labour.'
The Pope, who loved him, laid his hands upon his shoulders
and said: 'You are gaining both for soul and body; have
no fear!' Michael Angelo's self-defence increased the
Pope's love, and he ordered him to repair next day with
Vasari to the Vigna Giulia, where they held long discourses
upon matters of art."</p>
</quote>

<p>Vasari also tells us of the transfer of a piece of engineering
work from Michael Angelo to his enemy&mdash;if such
<pb n="245" /><anchor id="Pg245" />a small man deserves to be called the enemy of Michael
Angelo&mdash;Nanni di Baccio Bigio. The old bridge of Santa
Maria had long shown signs of giving way, and it had to
be rebuilt. Paul III. entrusted the work to Michael
Angelo. Nanni got it transferred to him by the influence
of his friends with the new Pope. The man laid his
foundations badly. Michael Angelo, riding over the new
bridge one day with Vasari, cried out: "Giorgio, the
bridge shakes beneath us; let us spur on before it gives
way with us upon it." Ultimately the prophecy was fulfilled,
and the bridge fell during a great inundation. Its
ruins are known as the Ponte Rotto to this day.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Julius III. died in 1555, and Cardinal Marcello
Cervini was elected in his stead, under the title of
Marcellus II. He had been Michael Angelo's adversary at
the great conference, so the hopes of the Setti Sangalleschi
revived, and Michael Angelo began to think of accepting
the oft-repeated invitations of the Duke of Tuscany, who
had long pressed him to come and reside again in Florence,
and dignify his native city with his presence during his
remaining years; but Marcellus died after a reign of only
a few weeks, and Pius IV., the next Pope, persuaded
Michael Angelo not to forsake his work at Saint Peter's.
In a letter to Vasari, intended for the ears of the Duke,
Michael Angelo states his mind.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlxxv. p. 537 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">To</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giorgio</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Excellent Painter, in Florence.</hi></p>

<p>"I was set to work upon Saint Peter's by force, and I
have served now about eight years, not only for nothing,
but with the utmost injury and discomfort to myself.
<pb n="246" /><anchor id="Pg246" />Now that the work is getting forward, and there is money
to spend, and I am about to turn the vault of the cupola,
if I left Rome it would be the ruin of the edifice, and for
me a great disgrace throughout all Christendom, and to my
soul a grievous sin. Therefore, Messer Giorgio, my friend,
I pray you that on my part you will thank the Duke for
his most gracious offer, and that you will ask his Lordship
to give me leave to continue here until such time
as I can depart with fame and honour and without sin.</p>

<p>"The eleventh day of May, 1555.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo Buonarroti</hi>, in Rome."</p>
</quote>

<p>Early in the year 1557 serious illness seized Michael
Angelo, and his good friends the Cardinal of Carpi,
Donato Giannotti, Tomaso Cavalieri, Francesco Bandini,
and Lottino ultimately succeeded in persuading him
to make a model of his cupola, that the work might
not be impeded or altered in the event of his death. He
mentions this in a letter to his nephew, Lionardo.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccii., dated February 13, 1557, p. 333 (in the
Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note> "I
prayed his Lordship that he would concede me so much
time that I could leave the works at St. Peter's at such a
point that my plans could not be changed. As yet this
point has not been reached; and more, I am now obliged
to construct a large wooden model for the cupola and
lantern, to secure its being finished as it was meant to be.
All Rome, and especially the Cardinal of Carpi, prayed
me to do this, so that I believe that I shall have to remain
here not less than a year; and so much time I beg the
Duke to allow me for the love of Christ and Saint Peter, so
that I may come home to Florence without such a grief,
<pb n="247" /><anchor id="Pg247" />but with a mind free from the necessity of returning to
Rome." This model was constructed by a French master,
named Jean, and took a year to make, as Michael Angelo
expected.</p>

<p>Continuous intrigues caused Michael Angelo to send in
his resignation in a haughty letter dated February 13,
1560, but Pius IV. confirmed the aged artist in his office,
and forbade any alteration of his design for Saint Peter's
after his death. Nanni di Baccio Bigio managed to influence
the deputies so that they appointed him Clerk of
the Works instead of Pier Luigi, surnamed Gaeta, who
was recommended by Michael Angelo in a letter<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdxciv. p. 558 (in the Archivio Buonarroti).</p></note> to them.</p>

<p>Nanni then made a report, severely blaming Michael
Angelo. The Pope had an interview with the artist, and
sent his relative, Gabrio Serbelloni to report on the works.
It was found that the irrepressible Nanni had again calumniated
Michael Angelo, and he was therefore dismissed.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the Pope's brief Michael Angelo's
design was most seriously altered after his death by the
erection of a long nave, making the ground plan a Latin
instead of Greek Cross. His idea appears to have been
that people should enter the church up a majestic flight of
steps through a gigantic door, and the hollow recesses of
the huge dome should be the dominant impression as
soon as the portal was passed. To get his effect it is
necessary to proceed half-way up the present nave with
closed eyes, or merely looking at the pavement, the eyes
religiously kept down. Any one who will make this
simple experiment (it is necessary to have a friend as
guide to tell you when you have arrived at the right point
of view) will see that Michael Angelo intended his building
<pb n="248" /><anchor id="Pg248" />to have the effect of a coherent geometrical whole. The
sublime concave of the dome, with the four arms of the
great cross of equal size, will be all at once grasped by the
eye. The huge building is like a great naturally-formed
crystal with mathematically proportioned limbs, beautiful
in large things as in small. An old writer has well said:
"The cross, which Michael Angelo made Greek, is now
Latin; and if it be thus with the essential form, judge ye
of the details!" The wooden model of the dome made
under Michael Angelo's eyes is still in existence, and was
followed fairly accurately by Giacomo della Porta, who
completed that portion of the work.</p>

<p>Amongst the other schemes that occupied Michael
Angelo was the plan of the improvements upon the
Campidoglio, undertaken by a society of gentlemen and
artists. Paul III. approved their design, and we may
believe, as all Roman citizens will tell us, that Michael
Angelo conceived, at least in its broad lines, the
present effect of the Capitol. Vasari informs us that
Michael Angelo's old friend, Tomaso dei Cavalieri,
superintended the work after the great sculptor's death;
we may trust him not to have departed from the master's
plans. Another scheme that interested Michael Angelo
considerably was the design for the church that the
Florentine residents in Rome wished to erect to their
patron saint, San Giovanni. A letter to his nephew
Lionardo mentions it.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cccxiv., dated July 15, 1559, p. 345 (in the Archivio
Buonarroti).</p></note> "The Florentines are minded
to erect a great edifice, that is to say, their church, and
all of them with one accord put pressure on me to attend
to this. I have answered that I am here by the Duke's
<pb n="249" /><anchor id="Pg249" />licence for the work at Saint Peter's, and that without his
leave they will get nothing out of me." The Duke not
only gave his permission but was enthusiastic about the
scheme. Michael Angelo promised to send him his plan.
"This I have had copied and drawn out more clearly than
I have been able to do it, on account of old age, and will
send it to your most Illustrious Lordship." Vasari tells
us that Tiberio Calcagni, "of gentle manners and discreet
behaviour," not only copied this design, but also made a
model in clay under the master's supervision. Michael
Angelo informed the building committee that "if they
carried it out, neither the Romans or the Greeks ever
erected so fine an edifice in any of their temples; words,
the like of which neither before or afterwards issued from
his lips, for he was exceedingly modest," says Vasari.
Money was lacking and the scheme fell through; both
model and drawing were allowed to perish. The present
church of San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, in Strada Giulia,
is the work of Giacomo della Porta; the west part is by
Alessandro Galilei.</p>

<p>Tiberio Calcagni was appointed to finish the bust of
Brutus, now in the Bargello at Florence. Michael Angelo
began it for Cardinal Ridolfi at the request of his friend,
Donato Giannotti. Tiberio had the sense and good
feeling not to touch his master's own work, but only
carved the base and the drapery; the face of the bust
remains a magnificent specimen of the great sculptor's
handiwork. This powerfully-conceived head is said to
have been taken from a small intaglio cut in cornelian.
It has been pointed out that the chisel marks are cut
by both the right and left hand. The vigour of the
workmanship indicates that the bust was begun soon after
<pb n="250" /><anchor id="Pg250" />Michael Angelo left Florence in 1584, and may indicate
Michael Angelo's feelings towards the tyrant Alessandro
de' Medici. We may remember in this connection that
the exiles nicknamed Lorenzino, his murderer, Brutus.</p>

<p>The Duke of Florence, through Vasari,<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, Nos, cdlxxxv., cdlxxxvi. pp. 548, 550.</p></note> attempted
to get at the ideas of Michael Angelo with regard to the
Medici Chapel and the entrance to the Laurenziana, but
the old man had lost and forgotten the plans, if he had
ever made them. The difficulties that beset the Duke
and the academicians in completing the designs, and the
meagreness of Michael Angelo's instructions to them,
must give us pause when we attempt to attribute the
faults of these monuments to the master mind. "About
the staircase of the Library, of which so much has been
said to me, believe that if I could remember how I had
arranged it I should not need to be begged for information.
There comes into my mind, as in a dream, the
image of a certain staircase, but I do not believe this can
be the one I then thought of, for it seems so stupid.
Nevertheless, I will write about it."</p>

<p>Leone Leoni erected the <corr sic="moument">monument</corr> of Giangiacomo de'
Medici in Milan Cathedral from a design supplied by
Michael Angelo at the request of Pope Pius IV. It is a
fine monument and the bronzes are excellent. In criticising
the design we must remember that Michael Angelo had
never seen the church where it was to be placed, and that
Leone was not the man to hesitate in taking liberties
with another's design, good sculptor as he was, and no
doubt Michael Angelo would have approved of a good
sculptor like him making the design fit the workmanship.</p>

<p rend="page-float: 'htbp'; text-align: center"><anchor id="image49" />
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image49.png">
<index index="fig" />
<head>BRUTUS</head>
<p rend="text-align: center">THE NATIONAL MUSEUM, THE BARGELLO, FLORENCE<lb />
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">By permission of the Fratelli Alinari, Florence</hi>)</p>
<figDesc>Image #49</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>The old master is supposed to have supplied designs
<pb n="251" /><anchor id="Pg251" />for many other buildings in Rome, such as the Porta Pia
and the Porta del Popolo, but there is nothing about them
to tell us that his genius is in them; probably slight
sketches were handed over to journeymen, who did pretty
much as they liked with them. It was otherwise with the
great restoration of the Baths of Diocletian. Michael
Angelo was commissioned by Pius IV. to convert them into
the Christian Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli. The
design has been altered by Vansitelli in 1749, and horrible
coloured imitations of clumsy marble altars have been
painted on the walls. Churchwardens' whitewash would
here be well applied. If the visitor will wait in this
church until dusk, when all the tawdry paintings vanish
into darkness, then the great columns will stand out in all
their dignity, and the noble cornice cast a splendid shadow
over the pillars of the huge hall. The roof and the pavement,
with their expression of space and distance, will
whisper "Michael Angelo!"</p>

<p>When Henry II. of France died, in 1559, his widow,
Catherine de' Medici, wrote to Michael Angelo asking him
to supply at least the design for the equestrian statue of
the late King she desired to set up in the courtyard of the
royal château at Blois. The sketch was prepared and the
work given to Daniele da Volterra. Catherine wrote again
in 1560,<note place="foot"><p>Gotti. i. 351.</p></note> telling the sculptor that she had deposited
6000 golden scudi with Gianbattista Gondi for the said
work, "therefore, since on my side nothing remains to be
done, I entreat you by the love you have always shown to
my house, to our country,<note place="foot"><p>Florence.</p></note> and lastly to genius, that you
will endeavour with all diligence and assiduity, so far as
your years permit, to carry out this noble work, so that
<pb n="252" /><anchor id="Pg252" />we may see and recognise my lord as in life by the accustomed
excellence of your unique genius. Although you
cannot add to your fame, yet you will at least augment
your reputation for a most grateful and loving spirit
toward myself and my ancestors, and will through centuries
keep fresh the memory of my lawful and only love, for
which I shall be ready and willing to reward you liberally."
The Queen had seen Michael Angelo's sketch, and she adds
in a postscript that "the king's head must be without
curls, and the modern rich style of armour and trappings
must be employed." She is very particular about the likeness
and sends a portrait; evidently she did not want anything
like the Roman generals in the Medici Chapel at
Florence. When Michael Angelo died the work was left
in the hands of Daniele, who was a slow workman, as Cellini
tells us. In 1566 Daniele died also, and only the
horse was cast; it now serves as part of Biard's statue of
Louis XIII.</p>

<p>In 1560 Leone Leoni made the well-known medal of
Michael Angelo, which is our best portrait of him. It
represents him in old age. Vasari relates the incident:
"At this time the Cavaliere Leone made a very lovely
portrait of Michael Angelo upon a medal, and to meet his
wishes modelled on the reverse a blind man led by a dog,
with this legend round the rim:</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">DOCEBO INIQUOS VIAS TVAS, ET IMPII AD TE CONVERTENTUR</p>

<p>It pleased Michael Angelo so much that he gave Leone a
wax model of a Hercules strangling Antæus, by his own
hand, together with some drawings. There exist no other
portraits of Michael Angelo, except two in painting, one
by Bugiardini, the other by Jacopo del Conte; and one in
<pb n="253" /><anchor id="Pg253" />bronze, in full relief, made by Daniele da Volterra. These,
and Leoni's medal, from which many copies have been made,
and a great number of them have been seen by me in
several parts of Italy and abroad." Francesco d'Olanda
made a drawing of the old man in hat and mantle.<note place="foot"><p>Reproduced in Yriarte's Florence, p. 280, English edition.</p></note>
Another portrait of Michael Angelo is introduced into
Marcello Venusti's copy of the Last Judgment, now in the
Picture Gallery at Naples. The original study for it may
be the portrait in the Casa Buonarroti, at Florence; it was
frequently repeated by him. One replica may be the portrait,
said to be by Michael Angelo's own hand, at the
Capitol. The apostle in red on the spectator's right of
the picture of the Assumption, by Daniele da Volterra, in
the Church of the Trinità de' Monti, in Rome, is also said
to be a portrait of Daniele's friend and master, who had
supplied him with the design for his great Crucifixion in
the same church. There is a life-size, full-face charcoal
drawing of the master in the Teyler Museum at Haarlem
which may be by the hand of Daniele, it has been pricked
for tracing. Bonasoni engraved a profile portrait of
Michael Angelo; it is dated 1546. It is a very faithful
and beautiful piece of work, and tells us what he looked
like at the age of seventy-two.<note place="foot"><p>See Frontispiece.</p></note> The bronze bust by
Daniele da Volterra, of which there are several copies, looks
as if it had been modelled from a mask taken after death;
at least, it was finished from one. Battista Lorenzi executed
the bronze bust on Michael Angelo's tomb at Santa Croce,
in Florence, from a similar mask.<note place="foot"><p>May we not hope that Michael Angelo's good friend, the Frate
Sebastiano del Piombo, painted a portrait of him during their long
friendship, and that it will come to light one of these days?</p></note></p>
<p><pb n="254" /><anchor id="Pg254" />During all these later years, Michael Angelo kept up
a brisk correspondence with his dutiful nephew Lionardo
about the purchase of land in Florence, and other family
matters.</p>

<p>Giovan Simone, the elder of Michael Angelo's surviving
brothers, died in 1548.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, cxci.-cxciii. pp. 217, 219, are on this subject (in the
British Museum).</p></note></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lionardo</hi>,&mdash;I hear from your last of Giovan Simone's
death. It gives me the greatest sorrow, for I still hoped,
although I am old, to have seen him before he died, and
before I died. God has willed it so. Patience! I should
like to hear particularly how he died, and if he confessed
and communicated with all the ordinances of the Church.
For if he did so, and I know it, I shall suffer less."
All through his life Michael Angelo is most punctilious
about the observances of the Church.</p>

<p>Lionardo was now the only hope of continuing the
family, so his uncle reminds him that if he does not
soon marry and get children, his property will all go to
the Hospital of San Martino.<note place="foot"><p>A hospital in Florence for the benefit of the Poveri Vergognosi,
poor folk who have come down in the world.</p></note> Old bachelor as he is, he
gives his nephew advice, in another letter, as to the choice
of a wife: "You ought not to look for a dower, but only
to consider whether the girl is well brought up, healthy,
of good character, and noble blood. You are not yourself
of such parts and person as to be worthy of the first
beauty of Florence. Let me tell you not to run after
money, but only look for virtue and good name."</p>
</quote>

<p>Lionardo married Cassandra Ridolfi in the year 1553,
and the first child born of this marriage was a boy, by
<pb n="255" /><anchor id="Pg255" />Michael Angelo's wish he was named Buonarroto. "I
shall be very pleased if the name of Buonarroto does not
die out of our family, it having lasted three hundred years
with us."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cclxix. p.299 (in the British Museum).</p></note> Vasari wrote to Michael Angelo describing the
festivities at the christening. Giorgio held the child at
the font in the Baptistry, "Mio bel Giovanni," as Michael
Angelo always called it.</p>

<p>The letters to Vasari are full of a courtly friendship
and regard; they are very pleasant reading. One of them
is the most beautiful and touching letter by his hand,
referring to the death of his servant Francesco, called
Urbino.<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlxxv p. 539.</p></note></p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messer Giorgio, dear friend</hi>,&mdash;Although I write but
badly, yet will I say a few words in reply to yours. You
know that Urbino is dead, for which I owe the greatest
thanks to God; at the same time my loss is heavy and
sorrow infinite. The grace is this, that while Urbino
living kept me alive, in dying he has taught me to die not
unwillingly, but rather with a desire for death. I had
him with me twenty-six years, and always found him
faithful and true. Now that I had made him rich, and
thought to keep him as the staff and rest of my old age,
he has departed, and the only hope left to me is that of
seeing him again in Paradise, and of this God has given a
sign in his most happy death. Even more than dying, it
grieved him to leave me alive in this treacherous world,
with so many troubles; the better part of me went with
him, nothing is left to me but endless sorrow. I
commend myself to you, and beg you, if it is not a
<pb n="256" /><anchor id="Pg256" />trouble to you, to make my excuses to Messer Benvenuto<note place="foot"><p>Cellini.</p></note>
for not answering his letter, for grief abounds in such
thoughts as these, so that I cannot write. Commend me
to him, and I commend myself to you.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">"Your <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Michael Angelo Buonarrota</hi>, in Rome.</p>

<p>"The 23 day of February, 1556."</p>
</quote>

<p>Was ever servant loved after this fashion by his
master?</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>Urbino appointed Michael Angelo as one of his
executors, and the old man fulfilled his irksome duties
with fidelity. Urbino's brother was Raphael's well-known
pupil Il Fattore. Cornelia, Urbino's wife, corresponded
about the children and other affairs. Michael Angelo had
to approve her choice of a second husband, and interviewed
him, and made him promise to be a second father to
Urbino's children.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" />

<p>The unusual event of an excursion by Michael Angelo
into the country took place in 1556, possibly with a
view to avoiding the troubles feared in Rome from the
Duke of Alva, Spanish Viceroy of Naples. Michael
Angelo informed his nephew that he was making a
pilgrimage to Loreto, but feeling tired stopped to rest at
Spoleto. To Vasari he says: "I have in these days had
a great pleasure, but with great discomfort and expense,
among the mountains of Spoleto, visiting the hermits
there. Less than half of me has come back to Rome, for
truly there is no peace except among the woods."<note place="foot"><p>Le Lettere, No. cdlxxix. Dec. 28, 1556, p. 541.</p></note></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="257" /><anchor id="Pg257" /><head>CHAPTER XI</head>

<head type="sub">THE END</head>

<p>Michael Angelo's little circle of devoted friends in
Rome were very anxious about him during the winter
of 1563-64. Although almost fourscore years and ten
he would still walk abroad in all weathers, and took none
of the precautions usual for a man of his age. Tiberio
Calcagni, writing on February 14 to Lionardo, says in
the letter published by Daelli:<note place="foot"><p>"Carte-Michelesché Inedite," p. 41.</p></note> "Walking through Rome
to-day I heard from many persons that Messer Michael
Angelo was ill, so I went at once to visit him, and
although it was raining I found him out of doors on foot.
When I saw him I said that I did not think it right and
seemly for him to be going about in such weather. 'What
do you want?' he answered; 'I am ill, and cannot find rest
anywhere!' The uncertainty of his speech, with the look
and colour of his face, made me extremely uneasy about
his life. The end may not be just now, but I fear greatly
that it cannot be far off." The gray colour and the uneasiness
of an old man who has suffered a slight stroke are
evidently indicated here. During the next four days he
lived in his arm-chair. On the 15th, Diomede Leoni wrote
to Lionardo, with a letter enclosed, signed by Michael Angelo
but written by Daniele da Volterra.<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. 354.</p></note> After exhorting
<pb n="258" /><anchor id="Pg258" />Lionardo to come to Rome, but to run no risks by travelling
too fast, he adds, "as you may be certain Messer Tomaso
dei Cavalieri, Messer Daniele, and I will not fail during your
absence in every possible service in your place. Besides,
Antonio, the old and faithful servant of the master, will
give a good account of himself under any circumstances.
 ... If the illness of the master be dangerous, which God
forbid, you could not be in time to find him alive, even if
you could make more haste than is possible. But to give
you a little account of the state of Messere up to this
hour, which is the third of the night,<note place="foot"><p>A little after 8 <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">p.m.</hi></p></note> I inform you that
just now I left him quite composed and fully conscious,
but oppressed with continual drowsiness. In order to
shake it off, between twenty-two and twenty-three,<note place="foot"><p>Four o'clock in the afternoon.</p></note> this
very day he tried to mount his horse and go for a ride, as
he was wont to do every evening in good weather, but the
coolness of the season and the weakness of his head and
legs prevented him, so he went back to his seat a little way
from the fire. He greatly prefers this chair to his bed.
We all pray God to preserve him unto us still for some
years and that He may bring you here in safety, to whom
I earnestly commend myself."</p>

<p>Two days later, on the 17th, Tiberio Calcagni wrote:<note place="foot"><p>Gotti, i. p. 354.</p></note>
"This is only to beg you to hasten your coming as much
as possible, even though the weather be bad. For your
Messer Michael Angelo is going to leave us indeed, and
he would have this one satisfaction the more."</p>

<p>Michael Angelo died a little before five o'clock on the
afternoon of February 18, 1564. His physicians, Federigo
Donati and Gherardo Fidelissimi, were with him at the
<pb n="259" /><anchor id="Pg259" />last. Giorgio Vasari tells us "he made his will in three
words, committing his soul into the hands of God, his
body to the earth, and his goods to his nearest relatives,
telling them when their hour came to remember the
Passion of Jesus Christ."</p>

<p>The Florentine envoy sent a despatch to inform the
Duke of the event, and he tells him the arrangements
made as to the inventory of property and the disposal for
safe-keeping of seven or eight thousand crowns found in a
sealed box, opened in the presence of Messer Tomaso dei
Cavalieri and Maestro Daniele da Volterra. The people of
the house are to be examined whether anything has been
carried away from it. This is not supposed to have been
the case. "As far as drawings are concerned they say
that he burned what he had by him before he died.
What there is shall be handed over to his nephew when
he comes, and this your Excellency can inform him." The
list of works of art found in the house is very small. They
were:</p>

<p>A blocked-out statue of Saint Peter.</p>

<p>An unfinished Christ with another figure.</p>

<p>A statuette of Christ with the Cross, like the Risen
Christ in Santa Maria Sopra Minerva; and</p>

<p>Ten original drawings, one, a Pietà, belonged to
Tommaso dei Cavalieri.</p>

<p>A little design for the façade of a palace.</p>

<p>A design for a window in the Church of Saint Peters.</p>

<p>An old plan of the Church of Saint Peter's, said to be
after the model of San Gallo, on several pieces of paper
glued together.</p>

<p>A drawing of three small figures.</p>

<p>Architectural drawings for a window and other details.</p>

<p><pb n="260" /><anchor id="Pg260" />A large cartoon for a Pietà, with nine figures,
unfinished.</p>

<p>Another large cartoon, with three large figures and
two putti.</p>

<p>Another large cartoon, with one large figure only.</p>

<p>Another large cartoon, with the figures of our Lord
Jesus Christ and the glorious Virgin Mary, His mother.</p>

<p>Another, the Epiphany.</p>

<p>This last drawing was presented to the notary who
drew up the will, and is supposed to be the cartoon now
in the British Museum; all the others went to Lionardo
Buonarroti. Lionardo arrived three days after the death.
The body was deposited upon a catafalque in the Church of
the Santissimi Apostoli, where the funeral was celebrated
by all the artists and Florentines in Rome. In fulfilment
of the wish of Michael Angelo, repeated two days before
his death, Lionardo made arrangements for the removal of
his uncle's remains to Florence. But the Romans, who regarded
him as a fellow citizen, resented this, and Lionardo
was obliged to send the body away disguised as a bale of
merchandise, addressed to the custom-house at Florence.
Vasari wrote, on March 10, duly informing him that the
packing-case had arrived, and had been left under seals
until Lionardo's arrival at the custom-house. Notwithstanding
this letter from Vasari, it appears that the body
was removed, on March 11, to the oratory of the Assunta,
beneath the Church of San Pietro Maggiore. Next day
the painters, sculptors, and architects of the newly-founded
Academy, of which Michael Angelo had been elected
Principal after the Duke, met at the church, intending to
bring the body secretly to Santa Croce. They had with
them only an embroidered pall of velvet and a crucifix to
<pb n="261" /><anchor id="Pg261" />place upon the bier. At night the elder men lighted
torches and the younger strove with one another to bear
the coffin. Meantime the curious Florentines found out
that something was going forward, and a great concourse
assembled as the news spread that Michael Angelo was
being carried to Santa Croce, and huge crowds followed the
humble procession, lighted by the flaring torches such as the
Misericordia carry to this day. The vast church of Santa
Croce was so crowded that the pall-bearers had difficulty
in reaching the sacristy with their burden. When they at
last got there, Don Vincenzo Borghini, Lieutenant of the
Academy, "thinking he would do what was pleasing to
many, and also, as he afterwards confessed, desiring to
behold in death one whom he had never seen in life, or,
at any rate, at such an age that he did not remember it,
ordered the coffin to be opened. When this was done,
whereas he and all of us present expected to find the
corpse already corrupted and defaced, inasmuch as Michael
Angelo had been dead twenty-five days and twenty-two in
his coffin, lo! we beheld him instead perfect in all his
parts and without any evil odour; indeed, we might
have believed that he was resting in a sweet and very
tranquil slumber. Not only were the features of his face
exactly the same as when he was in life (except that the
colour was a little like that of death), none of his limbs
were injured or repulsive; the head and cheeks to the
touch felt as though he had passed away only a few
hours before. When the eagerness of the multitude
who crowded round had calmed down a little, the coffin
was deposited in the church, behind the altar of the
Cavalcanti."</p>

<p>Those who would read of the gorgeous catafalque of
<pb n="262" /><anchor id="Pg262" />stucco, woodwork, and painting erected in the Church of
San Lorenzo by the Academy, may do so in the pages of
Vasari, and in the book called "Esequie del Divino Michel
Angelo Buonarroti, celebrate in Firenze dall' Academia, &amp;c.,
Firenze, i Giunti, 1564," and Varchi's "Orazione Funerali,"
published by the same house at the same date. The great
artist is dead: let us leave him to his rest in Santa Croce,
the Westminster Abbey of his city and the church of
his ward.</p>

<p>Vasari received from Lionardo Buonarroti the commission
to design the tomb for Santa Croce. He did his
best to get the Pietà now in the Duomo to serve as the
principal part of the monument, asserting that it had been
intended by Michael Angelo for his monument. "Besides,
there is an old man in the group who represents the
sculptor." This plan did not succeed, and the ugly monument
now in existence was designed instead. The Duke
supplied the marbles, and the figures were carved by
Giovanni dall' Opera, Lorenzi and Valerio Cioli. The bust
portrait in bronze was modelled by Battista Lorenzi. It
was erected in 1570, and bears the inscription:</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
MICHAELI ANGELO BONAROTIO<lb />
E VETVSTA SIMONIORVM FAMILIA<lb />
SCVLPTORI. PICTORI. ET ARCHITECTO<lb />
FAMA OMNIBVS NOTISSIMO.<lb />
LEONARDVS PATRVO AMANTIS. ET DE SE OPTIME MERITO<lb />
TRANSLATIS ROMA EIVS OSSIBVS. ATQVE IN HOC TEMPLO MAIOR<lb />
SVOR SEPVLCRO CONDITIS. COHORTANTE SERENISS. COSMO MED.<lb />
MAGNO HETRVRIAE DVCE. P. C.<lb />
ANN. SAL. CIC. IC. LXX<lb />
VIXIT ANN. LXXXVIII. M. XI. D. XV.</p>

<p>The Romans also erected a monument in the church
where they had hoped to keep the bones of the artist who
<pb n="263" /><anchor id="Pg263" />did more for their Immortal City than any man who ever
lived. Over this monument is the following epitaph:</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">MICHAEL ANGELUS<lb />
BONARROTIUS<lb />
SCULPTOR PICTOR ARCHITECTUS<lb />
MAXIMA ARTIFICUM FREQUENTIA<lb />
IN HAC BASILICA SS. XII APOST. F.M.C.<lb />
XI CAL. MART. A. MDLXIV ELATUS EST<lb />
CLAM INDE FLORENTIAM TRANSLATUS<lb />
ET IN TEMPLO S. CRUCIS EORUMD. F.<lb />
V. ID. MART. EJUSD. A. CONDITUS<lb />
TANTO NOMINI<lb />
NULLUM PAR ELOGIUM</p>

<p>Michael Angelo formed no school, his love of excellence
would not permit him to leave any inferior work behind
him, as Raphael did in certain portions of the Stanze and
Loggia of the Vatican. Michael Angelo's disposition was
not so genial nor were his manners so universally pleasing
as those of the gentle Raphael, so he was unable to keep
a body of workmen together in good temper; the result is,
we have no Sala of Constantine, or Palazzo del Tè, to
remind us of the passing of the master of a school. At
the same time, to his few assistants and workmen Michael
Angelo was as kind as father to son, when once he
became accustomed to them about him. He gave help
to various other artists, and it may be noted that all
those he influenced became men devoted to high finish
and the utmost perfection possible. Decadence in Italian
art began long before his death; but the imitators of
Michael Angelo are by far the best and most interesting
figures of that unfortunate period. They, at least, have
great intentions, and strive to attain a style of dignity and
distinction, and do not grudge any labour that may help
<pb n="264" /><anchor id="Pg264" />them to their ideals. Vasari tells us of some of these
men and their works: "He loved his workmen and was on
friendly terms with them. Among them were Jacopo
Sansovino, Il Pontormo, Daniele da Volterra, and Giorgio
Vasari Aretino, to whom he showed infinite kindness...."
He goes on to say that "he was unfortunate in those who
lived with him, since he chanced upon natures unfit to
follow him. For Pietro Urbano, of Pistoja, his pupil, was
a man of talent, but would never work hard. Antonio
Mini had the will but not the brain, and hard wax takes
a bad impression. Ascanio della Ripa Transone (Condivi)
worked very hard, but nothing came of it either in work
or in designs." Jacopo l'Indaco and Mineghella were boon
companions of the master. A stone-cutter Domenico Fancelli
nicknamed Topolino, Pilote the goldsmith, Giuliano Bugiardini
the painter, were of this company. The melancholy
Michael Angelo is said to have burst his sides with laughing
at Mineghella's stupidity. The very proper Vasari describes
the latter as "a mean and stupid painter of Valdarno,
but a very amusing person; and Michael Angelo,
who could with difficulty be made to work for kings, would
leave everything to make simple drawings for this fellow,
San Rocco, San Antonio, or San Francesco, to be coloured
for one of the man's many peasant patrons; among others
Michael Angelo made him a very beautiful model of a
Christ on the Cross, made a mould from it, and Mineghella
cast it in <hi rend="font-style: italic">papier-maché</hi> and went about selling it all over
the country-side." It may be that the familiar and often-repeated
Crucifix in common use is an adaptation or copy,
far removed from this original; it has something of the
style of Michael Angelo's later work, the figure is most
beautifully disposed.</p>

<p><pb n="265" /><anchor id="Pg265" />Sebastiano del Piombo lightened the old man's labour by
his genial humour and jovial companionship; Sebastiano
followed his teaching with great industry and skill, as all
his later works show; such as the Scourging of Christ,
in San Pietro in Montorio, and the Raising of Lazarus,
in our own National Gallery: drawings by the hand of
Michael Angelo still exist for the principal figures in both
these pictures. There is a Pietà by Sebastiano, at
Viterbo, evidently following the lines of one of Michael
Angelo's religious drawings; it is so beautiful in the
expression of its colour and the high finish of the nude,
that we cannot but think that Michael Angelo's exacting
eyes were peering over the shoulder of Sebastiano when he
painted it.</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Per ritornar là donde venne fora,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">L' immortal forma al tuo carcer terreno</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Venne com' angel di pietà si pieno</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Che sana ogn' intelletto, e'l mondo onora.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Questo sol m' arde, eqesto m' innamora;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Non pur di fora il tuo volto sereno:</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Ch' amor non già di cosa che vien meno</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Tien ferma speme, in cu' virtù dimora.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nè altro avvien di cose altere e nuove</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">In cui si preme la natura; e'l cielo</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">E ch' a lor parto largo s' apparecchia.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nè Dio, suo grazia, mi si mostra altrove,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Più che 'n alcun leggiadro e mortal velo;</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">È quel sol amo, perchè 'n quel si specchia.</l>
</lg>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="268" /><anchor id="Pg268" /><head>APPENDIX</head>

<p rend="text-align: center">THREE DIALOGUES ON PAINTING COMPOSED<lb />
BY FRANCISCO D'OLLANDA, A PORTUGUESE<lb />
MINIATURE PAINTER WHO WAS IN ROME<lb />
IN THE YEAR 1538. TRANSLATED<lb />
FROM THE PORTUGUESE, WITH<lb />
THE HELP OF MR. A.J. CLIFT,<lb />
BY CHARLES HOLROYD. THE<lb />
MANUSCRIPT WAS PUBLISHED<lb />
FOR THE FIRST<lb />
TIME IN THE RENASCENCA<lb />
PORTUGUEZA<lb />
NO. VII.<lb />
PORTO,<lb />
1896</p>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="269" /><anchor id="Pg269" /><head>FIRST DIALOGUE</head>

<p>My intention in going to Italy was not to seek for advantage
or honour, but to study. I was sent there by my King, and I
had no other interest in view (such as having intercourse with
the Pope or with the Cardinals of the Court; and this God
knows and Rome knows, if I had wished to dwell there per-adventure
I did not lack opportunities, both for myself and
by the favour of the principal persons in the Pope's household),
but all ideas of this kind were so subdued in me, that I
did not even allow them to enter into my imagination; others
I had, more noble and more to my taste, which had much
more power over me than covetousness or expectation of
benefits such as many people have who go to Rome. What
alone was always present to me was how I, with my art,
might serve the king our Lord, who had sent me there,
communing always with myself how I could steal and convey
away to Portugal the excellencies and beauties of Italy to
please the King and the Infantas and the most serene Infante
D. Luiz. I used to say to myself: What fortresses or foreign
cities have I not yet in my book? What immortal buildings
and what noble statues does this city still possess which I
have not already stolen from it and carried away without carts
or ships on thin paper? What painting, stucco, or grotesque
has been discovered amongst these grottoes and antiquities of
Rome, Puzol, and Baias, of which the most rare is not to be
found in my sketch-books? Thus I beheld nothing either
antique or modern in painting, sculpture or architecture of
<pb n="270" /><anchor id="Pg270" />which I did not make some record of its best part, it appearing
to me that these were the greatest benefits that I could
carry away with me, more honourable and profitable to the
service of my King and to my own taste. I do not think I
have made a mistake (although some people tell me I have),
for as these things alone were my care, my dispute and
demand, no great Cardinal Fernes had to help me, nor had I
a greater Dattario to obtain, in order to go one day to see
D. Julio de Macedonia, a most famous illuminator, and another
day Master Michael Angelo, now Baccio the noble sculptor;
then Master Perino, or Bastiäo Veneziano, and sometimes
Valerio de Vicença, or Jacopo Mellequino, architect, and
Lactancio Tolomei, the acquaintance and friendship of these
men I valued much more than others of more parade and
pretension (as if there could be greater in the world, and so
Rome values them); because from them, and from their
works in my art, I obtained some fruit and knowledge. I
amused myself in discussing with them many rare and noble
works both of ancient and modern times. Master Michael
especially I esteemed so much that if I met him either in the
palace of the Pope or in the street, we could not part until
the stars sent us to rest. D. Pedro Mascarenhas, the Ambassador,
is my witness what a great thing this was and how
difficult; and, too, of the tales M. Angelo, when coming out
of vespers one day, told about me and about a book of mine
in which I had drawn some things in Rome and Italy, to
Cardinal Santtiquatro and to him. Now my habit was to go
round the solemn temple of the Pantheon and note all its
columns and proportions; the Mausoleum of Adrian and that
of Augustus, the Coliseum, the Thermæ of Antoninus and
those of Diocletian, the Arch of Titus and that of Severus,
the Capitol, the theatre of Marcellus and all the other notable
things in that city, the names of which have already escaped
me. At times, too, I was not turned out of the magnificent
<pb n="271" /><anchor id="Pg271" />chambers of the Pope, I only went there because they were
painted by the noble hand of Raphael of Urbino. I loved
more those antique men of stone sculptured on the arches
and columns of the old buildings, than those more inconstant
which everywhere weary one with talking, I learned more
from them and from their grave silence.</p>

<p>Now amongst the days which I thus passed in that Court
there was a Sunday on which I went to see Messer Lactancio
Tolomei, as others did; it was he, with the assistance of
Messer Blosio, the Pope's secretary, who gave me the friendship
of Michael Angelo. And this M. Lactancio was a very
important personage, both on account of nobility of mind and
of blood (he being a nephew of the Cardinal of Siena), as
well as through his knowledge of Latin, Greek and Hebrew
letters, and for the authority of his years. But finding in
his house a message that he was at Monte Cavallo, in the
church of St. Silvester, with the Lady Marchioness of Pescara,
listening to a lecture from the Epistles of St. Paul, I went to
Monte Cavallo and to St. Silvester. Now Senhora Vittoria
Colonna, Marchioness of Pescara, and sister of Senhor Ascanio
Colonna, is one of the most illustrious and famous ladies in
Italy and in all Europe, which is the world, chaste yet beautiful,
a Latin scholar, well-informed and with all the other parts
of virtue and fairness to be praised in woman. She, after
the death of her great husband, took to a private and simple
life, contenting herself with the fact that she had already
lived in her estate, and loving henceforward only Jesu Christ
and good deeds, doing good to poor women and bearing the
fruits of a true Catholic. For my friendship with this lady
also I was indebted to M. Lactancio, who was the most
intimate friend that she had.</p>

<p>Having commanded me to sit down, the lecture and its
praises over, the Marchioness looking at me and at M. Lactancio,
if I remember rightly, said:</p>

<p><pb n="272" /><anchor id="Pg272" />"Francisco d'Ollanda will be better pleased to hear
M. Angelo talk about painting, than Brother Ambrosio
expound this lesson."</p>

<p>Then I, almost angry, answered her:</p>

<p>Why, madam, does it appear to your Excellency that I
can attend to nothing but painting? Truly I shall always be
pleased to hear M. Angelo, but when the Epistles of St. Paul
are read, I prefer to hear Brother Ambrosio."</p>

<p>"Do not be angry, M. Francisco," M. Lactancio then said,
"for the Marchioness does not think that the man who is a
painter will not be everything. We esteem painting higher
in Italy. But perchance she said that to you in order to give
you, beyond what you already have, the further pleasure of
hearing Michael."</p>

<p>I then replied:</p>

<p>"Her Excellency will be doing no more than she is in the
habit of doing, giving always greater favours than one dares
to ask."</p>

<p>The Marchioness, knowing my mind, called one of her
servants, and said, smiling:</p>

<p>"To those who know how to express thanks one must
study how to give, especially as I get as much in the giving
as Francisco d'Ollanda does in receiving. Foao, go to the
house of M. Angelo and tell him that I and M. Lactancio are
here in this quiet chapel, and that the church is closed and
very pleasant, if he cares to come and lose a little of the day
with us, so that we may gain it with him. And do not tell
him that Francisco d'Ollanda, the Spaniard, is here."</p>

<p>As I was whispering something about the discretion of the
Marchioness in everything, in the ear of Lactancio, she desired
to know what it was about.</p>

<p>"He was telling me," said Lactancio, "how well your
Excellency knows how to preserve decorum in everything,
even in a message. M. Michael is already more his friend
<pb n="273" /><anchor id="Pg273" />than mine, for he tells me that when they meet, Michael
Angelo does all he can to shun his company, seeing that
when they once come together they never can part."</p>

<p>"I know that, for I know Master Michael Angelo," she
returned; "but I do not know in what manner we shall treat
him so that we may lead him on to talk of painting."</p>

<p>Brother Ambrosio of Siena (one of the appointed preachers
to the Pope), who had not yet gone, said: "I do not believe
that if Michael knows the Spaniard to be a painter, he will
talk about painting at all, therefore let him hide himself
that he may hear him."</p>

<p>"It is perhaps not so easy to hide this Portuguese," I
replied with emphasis to the Friar, "from the eyes of Master
Michael Angelo; he will know me better hidden than your
reverence does here where I am, even if you put on spectacles;
and you will see that, being here, he will see me very plainly
if he comes."</p>

<p>Then the Marchioness and Lactancio laughed, but not I nor
yet the Friar, who however heard the Marchioness say that he
would find me to be something more than a painter.</p>

<p>After remaining but a short time silent, we heard a knocking
at the door, and all began to fear that Michael would not
come, as the messenger had returned so quickly. But Michael,
who resides at the foot of Monte Cavallo, happened by good
luck to be walking towards St. Silvester, on his way to the
Thermae by the Esquiline road with his Orbino, philosophising
by the way; being informed of the message, he could not
run away from us, nor did he fail to be the person knocking
at the door. The Marchioness rose to receive him, and remained
standing awhile before causing him to take a seat
between her and M. Lactancio. I sat a little way off, but the
Marchioness, remaining awhile without speaking, not wishing
to delay her practice of honouring those who conversed with
her, and the place where she was, commenced, with an art that
<pb n="274" /><anchor id="Pg274" />I could not describe, to say many things very well expressed,
and with thoughts most graciously stated, without ever touching
on painting, in order to ensure the great painter to us; and
I saw her as one wishing to reduce a well armed city by discretion
and guile; and we saw the painter, too, standing watchful
and vigilant, as if he were besieged, placing sentries in one
place and ordering bridges to be raised in another, making
mines and defending all the walls and towers; but finally the
Marchioness had to conquer, nor do I know who could defend
himself against her.</p>

<p>She said: "It is known that whoever comes into conflict
with M. Angelo in his own speciality, which is discretion,
cannot but be vanquished. It is necessary, M. Lactancio, that
we should talk with him about actions or briefs or painting to
put him to silence and to obtain any advantage over him."</p>

<p>"Nay," I then said, "I know of no better way of wearying
M. Angelo than by informing him that I am here, as he has
not seen me hitherto. But I already know that the way not
to see a person is to have him before one's eyes."</p>

<p>You should then have seen Michael turn himself towards
me with astonishment, and say:</p>

<p>"Forgive me, M. Francisco, for not having seen you for
had I not the Marchioness before my eyes, but as God has
sent you here, assist and help me as a comrade."</p>

<p>"For that reason only will I forgive you; but it seems to me
that the Marchioness causes with one light contrary effects,
as the sun does, which with the same rays melts and hardens,
because you were blinded by seeing her and I both hear and
see you, because I see her; and also because I know how much
a wise person will occupy himself with her Excellency, and how
little time she leaves for others; and therefore at times I do
not take the advice of some friars."</p>

<p>Here the Marchioness laughed again.</p>

<p>Then Friar Ambrosio rose and took leave of the Marchioness
<pb n="275" /><anchor id="Pg275" />and of us, remaining thenceforward a great friend of mine,
and he went away.</p>

<p>And now the Marchioness began to speak thus:</p>

<p>"His Holiness has done me the favour of allowing me to
build a nunnery for ladies here at the foot of Monte Cavallo,
by the broken portico, where it is said that Nero saw Rome
burning, so that the wicked footprints of such a man may be
trodden out by others more honest of holy women. I do not
know, M. Angelo, what shape and proportions to give to the
house, where the door should be placed, and whether some
of the old work may be adapted to the new?"</p>

<p>"Yes, madam," said Michael, "the broken portico might be
used as a campanile."</p>

<p>And this was so pleasant, and Michael said it so seriously
and in such a manner that M. Lactancio could not help calling
attention to it; and the great painter added these words:</p>

<p>"I quite think your Excellency may build the nunnery; and
when we leave here, with your permission, we may very well
go and look at the site, so as to give you some drawing
for it."</p>

<p>"I did not dare to ask you for so much," she said, "but I
already knew that in everything you follow the doctrine of the
Lord: <hi rend="font-style: italic">deposuit potentes, exaltavit humiles</hi>; and in that also you
are excellent, for you acknowledge yourself at last as discreetly
generous and not as an ignorant prodigal. And therefore
in Rome those who know you esteem you even more than
your works; and those who do not know you esteem only the
least of you, which are the works of your hands. And certainly
I do not give any less praise to your knowledge of how
to retire within yourself and fly from our useless conversations,
and to your wisdom in not painting for all the princes who ask
you to do so, but confining yourself to the painting of a single
work during all your life as you have done,"</p>

<p>"Madam," said Michael, "perchance you attribute to me
<pb n="276" /><anchor id="Pg276" />more than I deserve; but in doing so you remind me that I
wish to make a complaint against many persons, on my own
behalf and on behalf of painters of my temperament, and also
on behalf of M. Francisco here.</p>

<p>"There are many persons who maintain a thousand lies, and
one is that eminent painters are eccentric and that their conversation
is intolerable and harsh, they are only human all the
while, and thus fools and unreasonable persons consider them
fantastic and fanciful, allowing them with much difficulty the
conditions necessary to a painter. It is quite true that such
conditions are only necessary where there is a real painter,
which is in very few places, as in Italy, where there is the
perfection of all things; but foolish, idle persons are unreasonable
in expecting so many compliments from a busy
man: few mortals fulfil their duty well, one who does will not
accuse another who is fulfilling his; painters are not in any
way unsociable through pride, but either because they find
few pursuits equal to painting, or in order not to corrupt
themselves with the useless conversation of idle people, and
debase the intellect from the lofty imaginations in which
they are always absorbed. And I affirm to your Excellency
that even his Holiness annoys and wearies me when at times
he talks to me and asks me somewhat roughly why do I not
come to see him, for I believe that I serve him better in not
going when he asks me, little needing me, when I wish to
work for him in my house; and I tell him that, as M. Angelo,
I serve him more thus than by standing before him all day,
as others do,"</p>

<p>"Oh, happy M. Angelo," said I at this stage, "my prince
is not a Pope, can he forgive me such a sin?"</p>

<p>"Such sins, M. Francisco, are just those which kings
pardon," said he, and added: "Sometimes, I may tell you,
my important duties have given me so much licence that
when, as I am talking to the Pope, I put this old felt hat non-chalantly
<pb n="277" /><anchor id="Pg277" />on my head, and talk to him very frankly, but even
for that he does not kill me; on the contrary, he has given me
a livelihood.<note place="foot"><p>Clement VII. used to say, "When Buonarroti comes to see me I
always take a seat and bid him be seated at once, feeling sure that he
will do so without leave or licence otherwise."&mdash;<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Translator</hi>.</p></note> And as I say, I have paid him more compliments
in his service than unnecessary ones to his person. If
perchance a man were so blind as to invent such an unprofitable
exchange, as it is for a man to separate himself and content
himself with himself whilst he loses his friends and makes
enemies of all, would it not be very wrong if they bore him
ill-will for that? But whoever has such a complexion both
because the force of his duty demands it, and because of his
having been born with a dislike of ceremony and dissimulation,
it seems very foolish not to allow him to live. And if
such a man is so moderate that he does not want anything of
you, what do you want with him? And why should you
wish to use him in those vanities for which his quietness is
not fitted? Do you not know that there are sciences that
require the whole man without ever leaving him free for your
idle trivialities? When he has as little to do as you have, let
him be killed if he does not observe your rules of etiquette
and compliment even better than you. You only seek his
company and praise him in order to obtain honour through
him for yourselves, nor do you really mind what sort of man
he is, so long as a pope or an emperor converse with him.
And I dare affirm that he cannot be a great man who tries to
satisfy idle persons rather than the men of his own craft, nor
can one who is in nowise singular and reserved or whatever
you may be pleased to call it, be better than the ordinary and
vulgar talents which are to be found without a lantern in the
market-places of the world...."</p>

<p>Here Michael ceased speaking, and a little while afterwards
the Marchioness said:</p>

<p><pb n="278" /><anchor id="Pg278" />"If those friends of whom you are speaking had the discretion
of the friends of old, the evil would be smaller; when
Arcesilaus went one day to see Apelles, who was ill and in
need, this good friend raised his artist's head so as to arrange
the pillow and put underneath a sum of money for his cure,
which sum, having been found by the old woman attending
him, who was frightened at the amount, Apelles, smiling,
said: 'This money was stolen from Arcesilaus; do not be
astonished.'"</p>

<p>Then Lactancio added, in this manner, his opinion:
"Skilful artists would not exchange places with any other
kind of men however great they may be, so satisfied are they
with some special joyousness which they get from their art;
but I would counsel them to exchange at least with the
happy ones, if it seemed to me that they wished to do so, and
were it not that they consider themselves the most happy of
mortals. The mind which is capable of the very highest
painting knows where the lives and pleasures of the pre-sumptuous
lead them and what they are, and how they die
nameless and without knowledge of the things which in the
world are most worthy of being known and esteemed, and
how we cannot even remember that such a man was born
however much money he may have kept in his coffers.
And thus he understands that good work and the good
name of immortal virtue is the felicity of this life and all or
almost all that is to be desired; and therefore he esteems
himself more because he is on the road to attain that glory
than one who does not know this and never even knew how
to desire it. Many are content with much less power than that
of imitating a work of God as in painting; and if one never
attained to the distinction of governing a great province, it
is but human to be satisfied with things which are more
difficult and more uncertain than governing a country which
stretched from the Columns of Hercules to the Indian River
<pb n="279" /><anchor id="Pg279" />Ganges. Such an one never killed an enemy more difficult
to conquer than is the conforming the work to the desire or
idea of the great painter, and the one was never so satisfied
drinking out of a golden cup as the other drinking out of an
earthen pot. Nor was the Emperor Maximilian wrong in
saying that he could indeed make a duke or a count, but
as for an excellent painter God alone could make him when
He so pleased, for which reason he abstained from putting to
death a painter who deserved to die."</p>

<p>"What do you advise me to do, Master Lactancio," the
Marchioness then said; "shall I put a question to M. Angelo
about painting, as he now, in order to prove to me that
great men are justified in their ways and not eccentric, may
take measures like those he is accustomed to take?"</p>

<p>And Lactancio: "For your Excellency, Madam, M. Michael
cannot help constraining himself and giving out here that
which it is well that he keeps close elsewhere."</p>

<p>M. Angelo said: "I beg of your Excellency to tell me what
I can give to her and it shall be given."</p>

<p>And she, smiling: "I very much wish to know, as we are
dealing with this subject, what you think of the painting of
Flanders and whom it will satisfy, because it appears to me
more devout than the Italian style."</p>

<p>"The painting of Flanders, Madam," answered the artist
slowly, "will generally satisfy any devout person more than
the painting of Italy, which will never cause him to drop a
single tear, but that of Flanders will cause him to shed many;
this is not owing to the vigour and goodness of that painting,
but to the goodness of such devout person; women will like
it, especially very old ones, or very young ones. It will
please likewise friars and nuns, and also some noble persons
who have no ear for true harmony. They paint in Flanders,
only to deceive the external eye, things that gladden you and
of which you cannot speak ill, and saints and prophets.
<pb n="280" /><anchor id="Pg280" />Their painting is of stuffs, bricks and mortar, the grass of the
fields, the shadows of trees, and bridges and rivers, which
they call landscapes, and little figures here and there; and
all this, although it may appear good to some eyes, is in truth
done without reasonableness or art, without symmetry or proportion,
without care in selecting or rejecting, and finally
without any substance or verve, and in spite of all this,
painting in some other parts is worse than it is in Flanders.
Neither do I speak so badly of Flemish painting because it is
all bad, but because it tries to do so many things at once (each
of which alone would suffice for a great work) so that it does
not do anything really well.</p>

<p>"Only works which are done in Italy can be called true
painting, and therefore we call good painting Italian, for if it
were done so well in another country, we should give it the
name of that country or province. As for the good painting
of this country, there is nothing more noble or devout, for
with wise persons nothing causes devotion to be remembered,
or to arise, more than the difficulty of the perfection which
unites itself with and joins God; because good painting is
nothing else but a copy of the perfections of God and a
reminder of His painting. Finally, good painting is a music
and a melody which intellect only can appreciate, and with
great difficulty. This painting is so rare that few are capable of
doing or attaining to it. And I further say (which whoever
notes it will consider important) that of all the climates
or countries lighted by the sun and the moon, in no other
can one paint well but in the kingdom of Italy; and it is a
thing which is nearly impossible to do well except here, even
though there were more talented men in the other provinces,
if there could be such, and this for reasons which we will
give you. Take a great man from another kingdom, and
tell him to paint whatever he likes and can do best, and let
him do it; and take a bad Italian apprentice and order
<pb n="281" /><anchor id="Pg281" />him to make a drawing, or to paint whatever you like, and
let him do it; you will find, if you understand it well, that
the drawing of that apprentice, as regards art, has more
substance than that of the other master, and what he
attempted to do is worth more than everything that the
other ever did. Order a great master, who is not an
Italian, even though it be Alberto,<note place="foot"><p>Albert Dürer.</p></note> a man delicate in his
manner, in order to deceive me, or Francisco d'Ollanda
there, to counterfeit a work which shall be like an Italian
work, and if it cannot be a very good one let it be an ordinary
or a bad painting, and I assure you that it will be
immediately recognised that the work was not done in Italy,
nor by the hand of an Italian. I likewise affirm that no
nation or people (I except one or two Spaniards) can perfectly
satisfy or imitate the Italian manner of painting (which is the
old Greek manner) without his being immediately recognised
as a foreigner, whatever efforts he may make, and however
hard he may work to do so. And if by some great miracle
such a foreigner should succeed in painting well, then,
although he may not have done it in order to imitate Italian
work, it will be said that he painted like an Italian. Thus
it is that all painting done in Italy is not called Italian
painting, but all that is good and direct is, for in this country
works of illustrious painting are done in a more masterly
and more serious manner than in any other place. We call
good painting <hi rend="font-style: italic">Italian</hi>, which painting, even though it be done
in Flanders or in Spain (which approaches us most) if it be
good, will be Italian painting, for this most noble science
does not belong to any country, <hi rend="font-style: italic">as it came from heaven</hi>; but
even from ancient times it remained in our Italy more than
in any other kingdom in the world, and I think that it will
end in it."</p>

<p>So he spoke. Seeing that Michael was now silent, I urged
<pb n="282" /><anchor id="Pg282" />him on in this manner. "So, Master Michael Angelo, you
assert that out of all the nations of the world it is only
Italians who can paint? (Ollanda continues.)</p>

<p>"But what wonder in that? You must know that in Italy
painting is done well for many reasons, and outside Italy
painting is done badly for many reasons. Firstly, the nature
of the Italians is studious in the extreme, and the talented
already bring with them, when they are born, power of work,
taste and love of that to which they are inclined, and of that
which demands their genius; and if any one determines to
make a profession, and to pursue some art or liberal science,
he does not content himself with what is sufficient for him to
become rich thereby, and one of the number of the craftsmen,
but in order to be unique and distinguished he watches and
works continuously, and keeps before his eyes the great hope
of being a paragon of perfection (I speak where I know I am
believed) and not a mere mediocrity in that art or science.
This is because Italy does not esteem mediocrity, deeming it
an exceedingly poor thing; and speaks only of those, and
even praises them to the skies, who, like <hi rend="font-style: italic">eagles</hi>, surpass all
others, and penetrating the clouds approach the light of the
sun. Then, again, you are born in a province (is not this an
advantage?) which is the mother and protectress of all
sciences and disciplines, amongst so many relics of your
ancestors, which do not exist anywhere else, that already as
children you find before your eyes in the streets a great part
of whatever your inclination or genius may be inclined to;
and from youth upwards you are accustomed to see those
things which old men never saw in other kingdoms. Then,
growing up, although you may have been rude and rough, by
nature you are already so accustomed to have your eyes full of
the forms of the many old things of renown, that you cannot
fail to imitate them; and to all this are joined (as I say)
distinguished talent and indefatigable study and taste. You
<pb n="283" /><anchor id="Pg283" />have remarkable masters to imitate, and their works, and as
regards new works the cities are full of the curious things and
novelties which are discovered and found every day. And if
all these things do not suffice, although I should consider
them quite sufficient for the perfection of any science, at
least this is quite enough; namely, that we, Portuguese,
although some of us may be born with nice talent and minds&mdash;as
many are born&mdash;have a contempt for and consider it
fine to take little account of the arts, and we almost feel it a
disgrace to know much about them, wherefore we always
leave them imperfect and unfinished. You Italians alone, (I
cannot even say Germans or Frenchmen), give the greatest
honour, the greatest nobility and the power to be more, to a
man who is a splendid painter or splendid in some faculty;
and of all your noblemen, captains, wise men, satirists, cardinals
and Popes, that man only who may attain the reputation
of being perfect and rare in his profession is ever exalted
or thought much of by you. And as great princes are not
esteemed nor have any name in Italy, so it is a painter alone
that they call the <hi rend="font-style: italic">divine</hi>&mdash;Michael Angelo, as you will find in
letters which Aretino, satirist of all Christian gentlemen,
wrote you. Now, the payments and prices that in Italy are
given for paintings also appear to me to have a great deal to
do with the fact that painting cannot be done anywhere but
here, because frequently for a head or face from nature one
thousand 'cruzados' are paid, and many other works are
paid for as you, gentlemen, know better than I, very differently
from the way they are paid for in other kingdoms, seeing
that mine is among the magnificent and wide. Now, your
Excellency, please to judge whether these be hindrances or
helps."</p>

<p>"It seems to me," answered the Marchioness, "that before
these hindrances you must place talent and knowledge, which
are not transalpine but belong to the good Italian; however,
<pb n="284" /><anchor id="Pg284" />everywhere virtue is the same, good is the same, and evil is
the same, although they may have a different civilisation from
ours."</p>

<p>"If that," I answered, "were heard in my country, well,
Madam, they would be astonished both at your Excellency
praising me and in that manner, and by your making that difference
between Italians and other men whom you call 'transalpine,'
or from beyond the mountains:</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">'Non adeo obtusa gestamos pectora Poeni,</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Nec tam auersus equos, Lysia, sol iungit ab urbe.'</l>
</lg>

<p>"We have, Madam, in Portugal, good and ancient cities,
and principally my birthplace, Lisbon; we have good manners,
and good courtiers and valiant cavaliers and courageous
princes, both in war and in peace, and above all we have a very
powerful and splendid king, who with great calmness tempers
and governs us, and commands very distant provinces of barbarians,
whom he has converted to the Faith; and he is feared
by the whole East and by the whole of Mauritania and is a
patron of the Fine Arts, so much so that, through making a
mistake as to my talent, which in my youth promised some
fruit, he sent me to see Italy and its civilisation, and Master
Michael Angelo, whom I see here. It is quite true that we
have not such buildings and pictures as you have, but they are
already being made, and little by little they are losing that
barbarian superfluity that the Goths and Moors sowed throughout
Spain. I also hope that, on arriving in Portugal after
leaving here, I may assist either in the elegance of building
or in the nobility of painting, so that we may be able to
compete with you. Our science is almost entirely lost, and
without honour or renown in those kingdoms, and not through
the fault of others, but through the fault of the place and
disusage, to such extent that very few esteem it or understand
it unless it be our most serene king, by supporting all virtue
<pb n="285" /><anchor id="Pg285" />and patronising it; and likewise the most serene infante D.
Luiz, his brother, a very valorous and wise prince, who has a
very nice knowledge and discretion in every liberal art. All
the others neither understand nor esteem painting."</p>

<p>"They do well," said M. Angelo.</p>

<p>But Master Lactancio Tolomei, who had not spoken for
some time, proceeded in this manner:</p>

<p>"We Italians have this very great advantage over all other
nations in this great world, in the knowledge and honour of
all the illustrious and most worthy arts and sciences. But I
would have you to know, M. Francisco d'Ollanda, that whoever
does not understand and esteem the most noble art of
painting does so because of his own defects and not because
of the art, which is very noble and clear; and because he is
a barbarian and without judgment, and has no honourable part
in being a man. And this is proved by the example of the
most powerful old and modern emperors and kings, and of the
philosophers and wise persons who attained everything, and
who so greatly esteemed and appreciated the knowledge of
painting, and spoke of it with such high praises and examples,
and in making use of it and paying for it so liberally and magnificently
and, finally, by the great honour that the Mother
Church does it, with the holy Pontiffs, cardinals, and great
princes and prelates. And so you will find in all the past centuries,
all the past valorous peoples and nations held this art in
so much honour, that they admired nothing more nor considered
anything as a greater wonder. And then we see
Alexander the Great, Demetrius, and Ptolomy, famous kings,
together with many other princes, who readily boast of understanding
it; and amongst the Cæsars, Augustus the divine
Cæsar, Octavian Augustus, M. Agrippa, Claudius, and Caligula
and Nero, in this alone virtuous, likewise Vespasian and Titus,
as was shown in the famous retable of the Temple of Peace,
which he built after having vanquished the Jews and their
<pb n="286" /><anchor id="Pg286" />Jerusalem. What shall I say of the great Emperor Trajan?
What of Helius Adrianus, who with his own hand painted
singularly well, as the Greek Dion writes in his life, and Spartianus?
Then the divine Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Julius
Capitolinus, says how he learned to paint, Diognetus being
his teacher; and even Ælius Lampridius relates that the
Emperor Severus Alexander, who was an exceedingly powerful
prince, himself painted his genealogy to show that he descended
from the lineage of the Metelos. Of the great
Pompey, Plutarch says that in the city of Mitylene he drew
with a style the plan and shape of the theatre, in order to
have it afterwards built in Rome, which he did.</p>

<p>"And although, owing to its great effects and beauties, noble
painting merits all veneration without seeking praise from
other virtues, beside those proper to it, I still wished to show
here, before one who knows it, by what sort of men it was
esteemed. And if by chance, at any time or in any place,
there should be found any one who, because of being highly
placed and great, refuses to esteem this art, let him know
that others still greater appreciated it greatly. Who can compare
himself with Alexander the Greek? Who will exceed
the prowess of Cæsar the Roman? Who is of greater glory
than Pompey? Who more a prince than Trajan? For these
Alexanders and Cæsars not only dearly loved the divine
painting, and paid great prices for it, but with their own
hands they occupied themselves with it and touched it. Or
who, out of bravery and presumption, will despise it and be
not rather very humble and very unworthy before painting,
before her severe and grave face?"</p>

<p>Thus it seemed that Lactancio was finishing, when the
Marchioness proceeded, saying:</p>

<p>"Or who will be the virtuous and serene man (if he despises
it for its sanctity) who will not show great reverence and
adore the spiritual contemplation and devotion of holy
<pb n="287" /><anchor id="Pg287" />painting? I think that time would sooner be lacking than
material for the praises of this virtue. It produces joy in
the melancholy, it brings both the contented and the
angry man to the knowledge of human misery; it moves
the obstinate to compunction, the mundane to penitence,
the contemplative to contemplation, and the fearful to
shame. It shows us death and what we are, more gently
than in any other way; the torments and dangers of hell;
so far as is possible, it represents to us the glory and peace
of the blessed, and the incomprehensible image of our
Lord God. It represents to us the modesty of His saints,
the constancy of the martyrs, the purity of the virgins, the
beauty of the angels, and the love and ardour with which
the seraphim burn, better than in any other way, and lifts
up our spirit and plunges our mind into the depths beyond
the stars, to imagine the empirean that there exists. What
shall I say of how it brings before us the worthies who passed
away so long ago, and whose bones even are not now upon
this earth, to enable us to imitate them in their bright deeds?
Or how it shows us their councils and battles by examples
and delightful histories? Their great deeds, their piety and
their manners? To captains it shows the manoeuvres of the
old armies, the cohorts and their disposition, their discipline
and their military order. It animates and creates daring, by
emulation and an honest envy of the famous ones, as Scipio
the African confessed.</p>

<p>"It leaves a memorial of the present times for those who
come after. Painting shows us the garb of the pilgrim or of
antiquity, the variety of foreign peoples and nations, buildings,
animals, and monsters, which in writing it would be
prolix to hear about, and even then it would be but badly
understood. And not only these things does this noble art,
but it places before our eyes the image of any great man
who should be seen and known because of his deeds, and
<pb n="288" /><anchor id="Pg288" />likewise the beauty of a woman who is separated from us by
many leagues, a thing on which Pliny reflects much. To one
who dies it gives many years of life, his own face remaining
behind painted, and his wife is consoled, seeing daily before
her the image of her deceased husband, and the sons who
were left little children rejoice when men to know the
presence and the aspect of their dear father, and fear to
shame him."</p>

<p>As the Marchioness, almost weeping, made a pause here,
M. Lactancio, in order to draw her out of her sorrowful
imagination and memories, said:</p>

<p>"Besides all these things, which are great, what is there
that more ennobles or makes other things more beautiful
than painting, whether on arms, in temples, in palaces, or
fortresses, or anywhere else where beauty and order may
have a place? And so great minds assert that there is
nothing a man can find to fight against his mortality or
against the flight of time but painting only. Nor did Pithagoras
depart from this view when he said that only in three
things were men similar to the immortal God: in science,
in painting, and in music."</p>

<p>Here Master Michael said:</p>

<p>"I am sure that if in your Portugal, M. Francisco, they
were to see the beauty of the painting that is in some houses
in Italy, they could not be so uncultured as not to esteem it
greatly, and wish to attain to it; but it is not surprising that
they do not know or appreciate what they have never seen and
what they do not possess." Here M. Angelo rose, showing
that it was already time for him to retire and go; and likewise
the Marchioness rose; I asked her as a favour to invite
all that distinguished company for the following day in that
same place, and that M. Angelo should not fail to appear.
She did so, and he promised that he would come. And the
Marchioness going with the rest, M. Lactancio left with
<pb n="289" /><anchor id="Pg289" />Michael, and I and Diogo Zapata, a Spaniard, went with the
Marchioness from the monastery of St. Silvester at Monte
Cavallo to the other monastery where there is the head of
St. John the Baptist, and where the Marchioness resides,
and we left her with the mothers and nuns, and I went to
my residence.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>SECOND DIALOGUE</head>

<p>All that night I thought of the past day, and was preparing
myself for the one to come; but it frequently happens that
our arrangements prove uncertain and vain, and very contrary
to what we expect, as I then learnt. On the following day
M. Lactancio sent me word that we could not meet as we had
arranged, owing to certain business matters which had cropped
up both for the Lady Marchioness and likewise for Michael
Angelo himself, but he asked me to be at St. Silvester's in
eight days' time, as that day had been agreed upon.</p>

<p>I found those eight days long, but finally, when Sunday
came, the time appeared to me to have been but short, for I
should have liked to have been better armed with knowledge
for such a noble company. When I arrived at St. Silvester
the lesson from the Epistles which Friar Ambrose read was
finished and he was gone, and they were beginning to complain
of my being late and about me.</p>

<p>After they had pardoned me, I having confessed to being a
laggard, and after the Marchioness had bantered me a little,
and I Messer Angelo in my turn, I obtained permission to
proceed with the former conversation about painting; I
commenced saying:</p>

<p>"I think, Senhor Michael Angelo, that last Sunday, when we
were about to part, you told me that if in the kingdom of
Portugal, which you here call Spain, they were to see the noble
<pb n="290" /><anchor id="Pg290" />pictures of Italy, they would esteem them greatly, for which
reason I beg as a favour (for I have come here for nothing else)
that you will not disdain to inform me what famous works in
painting there are in Italy, so that I may know how many I
have already seen, and how many I still have to see."</p>

<p>"You ask me a question which would take long to answer,
M. Francisco," said M. Angelo, "wide and difficult to put
together, for we know that there is no prince or private person
or nobleman in Italy, or any one of any pretension, however
little curious he may be about painting (to say nothing of those
excellent ones who adore it), who does not take steps to have
some relic of divine painting, or who at least, in so far as he
can, does not order many works to be executed. So that a
good portion of the beauty of our art is spread over many
noble cities, castles, country-seats, palaces and temples, and
other private and public buildings; but as I have not seen
them all in an orderly manner, I can only speak of some
which are the principal ones.</p>

<p>"In Siena there is some singular painting in the Municipal
Chamber and in other places; in Florence, my native place, in
the Palaces of the Medici, there is a grotesque by Giovanni
da Udine, and so throughout Tuscany. In Urbino, the Palace
of the Duke, who was himself half a painter, has a great
deal of praiseworthy work, and also in his country-seat called
'Imperial,' near Pesaro, erected by his wife, there is some
very magnificent painting. So, too, the Palace of the Duke
of Mantua, where Andrea painted the Triumph of Caius
Cæsar, is noble; but more so still is the work of the
Stable, painted by Julius, a pupil of Raphael, who now flourishes
in Mantua. In Ferrara we have the painting of Dosso
in the Palace of Castello, and in Padua they also praise the
loggia of M. Luis, and the Fortress of Lenhago. Now in
Venice there are admirable works by Chevalier Titian, a
valiant man in painting and in drawing from nature, in the
<pb n="291" /><anchor id="Pg291" />Library of St. Mark, some in the House of the Germans,
and others in churches and in other good hands; and the
whole of that city is a good painting.</p>

<p>"So in Pisa, in Lucca, in Bologna, in Piacenza, in Parma,
where there is the Parmesano,<note place="foot"><p>Parmigiano.</p></note> in Milan, and in Naples. So
in Genoa there is the house of Prince Doria, painted by Master
Perino, with great judgment, especially the Storm of the
Vessels of Æneas, in oils, and the ferocity of Neptune and his
sea-horses; and likewise in another room there is a fresco,
Jupiter fighting against the giants in Phlegra, overthrowing
them with thunderbolts; and nearly the whole city is
painted inside and out. And in many other castles and
cities of Italy, such as Orvieto, Esi,<note place="foot"><p>Assisi (?).</p></note> Ascoli, and Como, there
are pictures nobly painted, and all of great price, for I only
speak of such; and if we were to speak of the private paintings
and pictures that every one holds dearer than life, it would
be to speak of the innumerable, and there are to be found in
Italy some cities which are nearly all painted with tolerable
painting, inside and out."</p>

<p>It seemed that Michael was coming to a conclusion, when
the Lady Marchioness, looking at me, said:</p>

<p>"Do you not remark, M. Francisco, that M. Michael
abstained from speaking of Rome, the mother of painting, so
as not to talk of his own works? Now what he would not do,
let us not fail to do for the purpose of ensnaring him the more,
for when one deals with famous paintings, no other has such
value as the fount from which they are derived and proceed.
And this work is in the head and fount of the Church, I
mean in St. Peter's in Rome; a great vault, in fresco, with its
circuit and curvatures of arches, and a façade, in which M.
Angelo divinely made us understand and divided into
histories how God first created the world, with many images
of Sibyls and figures of exceedingly great artistic beauty
<pb n="292" /><anchor id="Pg292" />and artifice. And what is singular is, that doing nothing
more than this work, which as yet he has not completed, and
having commenced it when a youth, there is therein comprised
the work of twenty painters united in that vault alone.
Raphael of Urbino painted in this city a second work of such
art that it would have been the first if the other had not
existed. It is a hall and two chambers and a loggia in fresco,
in the palaces of the said St. Peter, a magnificent thing
of many elegant stories of a very decorous description. And
the story of Apollo playing his harp amongst the nine muses
in the Parnasus is singular. In the house<note place="foot"><p>The Farnesina.</p></note> of Augustimguis
(Chigi) Raphael has painted very preciously a poetry, the
story of Psyche, and very gracefully he surrounded Galatea
by mermen in the middle of the waves and by cupids in the
air. The picture in S. Pietro in Montorio of the Transfiguration
of our Lord,<note place="foot"><p>Now in the Vatican Gallery.</p></note> in oils, is very good, and another in Aracœli,
and in the Temple of Peace, in fresco.<note place="foot"><p>The church of Santa Maria della Pace.</p></note> The picture
in S. Pietro in Montorio by the hand of Bastiäo Veneziano<note place="foot"><p>Sebastiano del Piombo; the picture was the Raising of Lazarus,
No. 1 in the National Gallery.</p></note>
is famous; he did it in competition with Raphael. There
are many facades of palaces in this city, in white and black,<note place="foot"><p>Chiaroscuro, monochrome.</p></note>
by Baltesar<note place="foot"><p>Baldassare Peruzzi.</p></note> di Siena, architect, and by Marturino and by
Polidoro, a man who in that manner of working magnificently
enriched Rome. Further, there are here many palaces of
Cardinals and other men painted in grotesque and in stucco
and with many other varieties of art, for the city is more
painted than any other in the whole world, apart from the
private pictures that every one holds dearer than life itself.
But of the things outside the city, the Vigna, begun by Pope
Clement VII., at the foot of Monte Mario, is most worth seeing;
<pb n="293" /><anchor id="Pg293" />it is ornamented by the fine painting and sculpture of Raphael
and Julius, where the giant lies sleeping, whose feet the satyrs
are measuring with shepherds' crooks. You now see whether
these are works which would lead us to be silent about our
city."</p>

<p>And she was already ceasing to speak, when I remembered
me, and said:</p>

<p>"No doubt your Excellency also forgot the famous tomb or
chapel of the Medici in San Lorenzo, at Florence, painted in
marble by M. Angelo, with such a generous number of statues
in full relief that it can certainly compete with any of the
great works of antiquity; where the goddess or image of
Night, sleeping above the nocturnal bird, and the melancholy
Death in Life pleased me the most, although there are
there many noble sculptures around the Dawn. But I cannot
omit the mention of a painting which I saw, even though it
was outside Italy, in France or Provence, in the City of
Avignon, in a Franciscan monastery: it is that of a dead
woman who had been very beautiful, she was called the
Beautiful Anna; a king of France who liked painting and
who painted (if I am not mistaken) called Reynel, came to
Avignon and inquired whether the Beautiful Anna was there
because he greatly desired to see her to paint her from life,
and having been told that she had died shortly before, the
king caused her to be disinterred to see whether still in her
bones there were some traces of her beauty. He found her
clothed, in the old style, as if she were alive, with her golden
hair dressed on her head, but all the gay beauty of the face,
which alone was uncovered, had changed into a skull; notwithstanding
this, the painter king considered it so beautiful
that he painted her from nature, surrounding his work with
verses which mourn and are still mourning for her. Which
work I saw in that place and I thought it very worthy."</p>

<p>All were pleased with my picture, and M. Angelo added
<pb n="294" /><anchor id="Pg294" />that in Narbonne I would have also seen the picture
St. Sebastian in the Cathedral, and he said:</p>

<p>"In France there is some good painting, and the King of
France has many palaces and pleasure houses with innumerable
paintings, both in Fontainebleau, where the king kept
together two hundred painters, well paid, for a certain time;
and in Madrid, the pleasure house which he built, where
he voluntarily imprisons himself at times, in memory of
Madrid in Spain where he was a prisoner."</p>

<p>"I think," said M. Lactancio, "that I heard a while ago
Francisco d'Ollanda name amongst paintings the tomb that
you, Senhor Michael, sculptured in marble; but I do not
understand how sculpture can be called painting."</p>

<p>Then I began to laugh heartily, and begging permission of
the Master, said:</p>

<p>"To save Senhor Michael trouble I will reply to Senhor
Lactancio concerning this doubt of his, which has followed me
here from my own country.</p>

<p>"As you will find that all the employments which have
most art and reasonableness and grace are those which most
nearly approach the drawing or painting, so those which most
nearly approach it proceed from it and are a part or member of
it, such as sculpture or statuary, which is nothing else but
painting itself, although it may well appear to some to be a
separate art; it is, however, condemned to serve painting, its
mistress.</p>

<p>"And this I will give as a sufficient proof (as your Excellencies
well know), that in the books we find Phidias and
Praxiteles called painters, whilst it is certain that they were
sculptors in marble, seeing that the statues from their hands
in stone are here near us, on this hill, the horses which they
made, which King Teridade sent to Nero as a present, for
which reason in recent times this place is called Monte
Cavallo. And should this not be enough, I will add how
<pb n="295" /><anchor id="Pg295" />Donatello (who, with the permission of Master Michael, was
one of the first modern ones who in sculpture merited fame
and name in Italy) never said anything else to his pupils,
when teaching them, but draw, telling them in a single word
of doctrine: 'Pupils, I give you the whole art of sculpture
when I tell you&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">draw!</hi>' And so Pomponio Gaurico, sculptor,
also affirms in the book he wrote 'De Re Statuaria.' But
why do I seek examples and proofs afar, when perchance
they are near me? And so as not to speak of myself, I say
the great draughtsman, M. Angelo, who is here, also sculptures
in marble, which is not his art, and better even (if one
may say it) than he paints with the brush on a panel, and he
himself has told me sometimes that he finds the sculpture of
stone less difficult than the using of colours, and that he
deems it to be a very much greater thing to make a masterly
stroke with the brush than with the chisel. And even a
famous draughtsman, if he so desires, will by himself sculpture
and carve in hard marble, in bronze and in silver, exceedingly
large statues in full relief (which is a great thing), without
ever having taken a chisel in his hand; and this is owing to the
great virtue and power of drawing. It does not, therefore,
follow that a sculptor will know how to paint or how to hold a
brush, nor will he know how to paint and make a stroke like
a master, as I learnt a few days ago on going to see Baccio
Blandino,<note place="foot"><p>Bandinelli(?).</p></note> the sculptor, whom I found trying to paint in oils
and unable to do so. The draughtsman will be a master in
building palaces or temples, and will carve statues and will
paint pictures; for the said Master Michael and Raphael and
Baltesar di Siena,<note place="foot"><p>Baldassare Peruzzi.</p></note> famous painters, taught architecture and
sculpture, and Baltesar di Siena, after briefly studying that
art, equalled Bramante, a most eminent architect, who passed
all his life in its discipline, and yet he used to say that
it gave him an advantage, for he appreciated the invention,
<pb n="296" /><anchor id="Pg296" />fancy and freedom of drawing. I am speaking of true
painters."</p>

<p>"But I say, Senhor Lactancio," said Michael, assisting
M. Francisco, "that the painter of whom he speaks not only
will be instructed in liberal arts and other sciences such as
architecture and sculpture, which are his own province, but
also in all other manual crafts which are practised throughout
the world; should he wish, he will do them with more art
than the actual masters of them. However that may be, I
sometimes set myself thinking and imagining that I find
amongst men but one single art or science, and that is drawing
or painting, all others being members proceeding therefrom;
for if you carefully consider all that is being done in
this life you will find that each person is, without knowing it,
painting this world, creating and producing new forms and
figures here, in dress and the various garbs, in building and
occupying spaces with painted buildings and houses, in cultivating
the fields and ploughing the land into pictures and
sketches, in navigating the seas with sails, in fighting and
dividing the spoil, and finally in the 'firmamentos' and
burials and in all other operations, movements and actions.
I leave out all the handicrafts and arts, of which painting is
the principal fount, of which some are rivers which spring
from it, such as sculpture and architecture; some are brooks,
such as mechanical trades; and some are stagnant ponds,
which do not flow (such as useless handicrafts like cutting out
with scissors and such like), formed from the waters of the
flood when drawing overflowed its banks in old time and
inundated everything under its dominion and empire, as one
sees in the works of the Romans, all done in the manner of
painting. In all their painted buildings and fabrics, in all
works in gold, silver, or in metals, in all their vases and
ornaments, and even in the elegance of their coins, and in
their dress and armour, in their triumphs as well as in all
<pb n="297" /><anchor id="Pg297" />their other operations and works, one easily recognises how,
in the time when they held sway over all the earth, my lady
painting was the universal sovereign and mistress of all their
deeds and trades and sciences, extending herself even to
writing, and composing or writing histories. So that whosoever
well considers and understands human works, will find
without doubt that they are all either painting itself or some
part of painting; and although the painter be capable of
inventing what has not as yet been found, and of doing all
the handicrafts of the others with much more grace and
elegance than their own professors, yet no one but he can be
a true painter or draughtsman."</p>

<p>"I am satisfied," answered Lactancio, "and understand
better the great power of painting, which, as you stated, is
seen in all things of the ancients and even in writing and
composing. And perhaps notwithstanding your great imagination
you will not have been as much struck as I have
been with the conformity which letters have with painting
(for you will certainly hold letters to be a part of painting);
nor by how these two sciences are such legitimate sisters that,
if one be separated from the other, neither is perfect, although
it seems that these present times keep them in some way
separated. But yet every learned and consummate man will
find that in all his works he is always exercising to a great
extent the office of a good painter, painting and colouring
some intention of his with much care and devotion. Now in
opening the old books, the famous ones are few which are
not like painting; and it is certain that those which are the
heaviest and most confused are so for no other reason but
because the writers are not good draughtsmen and are not
very skilful in drawing and dividing up their work; and the
most facile and terse are those of the best draughtsman.
And even Quintilian in the perfection of his <hi rend="font-style: italic">Rhetoric</hi> lays it
down that not only in the division of the words his orator
<pb n="298" /><anchor id="Pg298" />should draw, but that with his own hand he should know how
to sketch and draw; and hence it is, Senhor M. Angelo, that
you may at times call a great man of letters or a great
preacher a good painter; and a great draughtsman you may
call a man of letters, and whosoever most penetrates into real
antiquity will find that painting and sculpture were both
called painting, and that in the time of Demosthenes they
called <hi rend="font-style: italic">writing</hi> 'antigraphia,' which means <hi rend="font-style: italic">drawing</hi>, and it was
a word common to both these sciences, and that the writings
of Agatharco can be called the painting of Agatharco. And
I think that the Egyptians also&mdash;all of them who had to
write or express anything&mdash;were accustomed to know how to
paint, and even their hieroglyphic signs were painted animals
and birds, as is shown by some obelisks in this city which came
from Egypt. But if I speak of poetry, it seems to me that it
will not be very difficult for me to show how true a sister she
is to painting. But so that Senhor Francisco may know how
much necessity he has for poetry, and how much he may
gain from the best of it, I will show him here how much care
the poets take (although this is matter for a young man
rather than for me) of their profession and intelligence, and
how much they praise and celebrate their art as being free
from penalties and blots; and it does not seem that the poets
worked for anything except to teach the beauties of painting,
and what ought to be avoided or done in it, with all their
suavity and music of verses, and with so many just and fluent
words that I do not know how I can repay them. Now one
of the things in which they put the most study and work (I
speak of the famous poets) is in painting well or in imitating
a good painting; and this is due to the accuracy which, with
the greatest promptness and care, they desire to express and
attain. And the one who can attain this is the one who is
the most excellent and clear. I remember that the prince of
them, Virgil, threw himself down to sleep at the foot of a
<pb n="299" /><anchor id="Pg299" />beech-tree, and how he has painted in words the forms of
two vases that Alcimedon had made in a cavern covered
with a wild vine, with some goats chewing willows, and some
blue hills smoking in the distance; then he remains resting
on one hand the whole day, to study how many winds and
clouds he will put into the Tempest of Æolus, and how he
will paint the Port of Carthage in a bay, with an island
standing apart, and with how many rocks and woods he will
surround it. Afterwards he paints Troy burning; then some
feasts in Sicily, and beyond near Cumas the gate of hell
with a thousand monsters, and chimeras, and many souls
passing Acheron; then the Elysian Fields, the host of the
Blest, the pains and torments of the Impious, and afterwards
the Arms of Vulcan, a fine piece of work; shortly
afterwards a painted Amazon, and the ferocity of capless
Turnus. He paints the routs in battle, the many dead, the
fates of noble men, the many spoils and trophies. Read the
whole of Virgil and you will not find in it anything but the
handicraft of a Michael Angelo. Lucan employs a hundred
pages in painting an enchantress and the breaking up of a
fine battle. Ovid is nothing else but a 'retavolo' (copyist).
Statius paints the house of sleep and the walls of great Thebes.
The poet Lucretius likewise paints, and Tibullus and Catullus
and Propertius. One paints a fountain, and a wood close by,
with Pan, the shepherd, playing a flute amongst the ewes.
Another paints a shrine with nymphs around dancing.
Another draws the drunken Bacchus, surrounded by wild
women, with old Silenus, half falling from an ass, who would
have fallen were he not held up by a satyr who carries a leathern
bottle. Even the satirical poet paints the picture of the labyrinth.
Now what do the lyric poets do, or the wits of Martial, or the
tragic or comic ones? What do they do but paint reasonably?
And what I say I do not invent, for each one of them himself
confesses that he paints: they called painting dumb poetry."</p>

<p><pb n="300" /><anchor id="Pg300" />At this point I said: "Senhor Lactancio, in calling painting
<hi rend="font-style: italic">dumb</hi> poetry it seems to me that the poets did not know
how to paint well, because, if they understood how much
more painting declares and speaks than poetry, her sister,
they would not say it was dumb, and I will maintain rather
that poetry is the more dumb."</p>

<p>The Marchioness said: "How will you prove, Spaniard,
what you say? how will you prove that painting is not dumb
and that poetry is? Let us hear, for in no more worthy discourse
could this day be spent, hearing what you maintain on
that subject; afterwards it may be possible to bring this company
together again, in another place."</p>

<p>"How can your Excellency wish," I answered, "that I
should dare to do so at once, and how should I be able to
interest this company with my little knowledge, especially as
I am a pupil of the lady who is dumb and has no tongue?
Particularly, too, as it is already late, if the light through
these windows does not deceive me; how can you order me
to praise my innamorata before her own husband and in such
an honourable court of those who know her worth? If there
were some powerful adversaries here I might attempt it,
although in this I am wrong, for it would be much easier to
vanquish enemies than to please these friends. But if your
Excellency desires so much to see me put to silence I will
speak, not as an enemy of poetry, for I am much indebted to
her, and I owe her much in the virtue of my profession, and
in the perfection which I so much desire, but to defend the
other lady, who is still more mine, for whose sake only I
rejoice to live, and for whom I confess I have a voice and
speak, she being dumb, solely because I one day saw her
move her eyes; and as she teaches one to speak by her eyes,
what would she do if she were to move her wise lips? Good
poets (as Senhor Lactancio said) do not do more with words
than even mediocre painters do with their works, for the
<pb n="301" /><anchor id="Pg301" />former recount what the latter express and declare. They
with fastidious meanings do not always engage one's ears,
whilst the latter satisfy one's eyes, as with some beautiful
spectacle they hold all men prisoners and entranced; and the
passage over which good poets most trouble themselves, and
which they hold as the greatest finesse, is to show you in
words (perchance too many and too long), as if painting a
storm on the sea, or the burning of a city, which storm, if
they were able, they would rather paint, for when you finish
the work of reading, you have already forgotten the commencement,
and you have only present the short verse on
which your eyes were last fixed; and the one who shows you
this best is the best poet.</p>

<p>"Now, how much more does painting say which shows you
that storm altogether with the thunder, lightning, waves,
vessels, and reefs, and you see: <hi rend="font-style: italic">omniaque viris ostentant praesentem
mortem</hi>, and in the same place: <hi rend="font-style: italic">ex-templo Aeneas tendens
ad sidera palmas</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">tres Eurus abreptas in saxa latentia torquet
emissamque hyemem sensit Neptunus et imis</hi>, and likewise it shows
very present and visibly all the burning of the city, in every
part, represented and seen as if it were really true; on one side
those who run through the streets and squares, on the other
those who jump from the walls and towers; here the temples
half demolished and the reflection of the flames in the rivers,
and the surrounded shores illuminated; how Pantheus as he
runs away limping with his idols, leading his grandchild by the
hand; how the Trojan horse gives birth in the centre of a
great square to armed men; how Neptune, very wrath, throws
down the walls; how Pyrrhus beheads Priam; Æneas with his
father on his shoulders, and Ascanius and Creusa who follow
him in the darkness of night, full of fear; and all this so
present and so connected and natural that very often you are
moved to think that you are not safe before it, and you are
glad to know they are only colours and that they cannot
<pb n="302" /><anchor id="Pg302" />inspire or do harm. It does not show you this spread out in
words, whilst you remember only the part which is before
your eyes having already forgotten the past and not knowing
the future, and which verses only the ears of a grammarian
can understand with difficulty, but one's eyes visibly enjoy
that spectacle as being true, and one's ears seem to hear the
actual cries and clamour of the painted figures; it seems as if
you smell the smoke, you fly from the flames, you fear the
fall of the buildings; you are ready to give a hand to those
who are falling, you defend those who are fighting against
numbers; you run away with those who run away and stand
firm with the courageous. Not only the learned are satisfied,
but also the simple, the countryman, the old woman; not only
these, but also the Sarmatian stranger, the Indian, and the
Persian (who never understood the verses of Virgil, or Homer,
which are dumb to them), delight themselves with and
understand that work with great pleasure and quickness; the
barbarian ceases to be barbarian, and understands, by virtue
of the eloquent painting, that which no poetry or numbered
feet could teach him. And the law of painting says: <hi rend="font-style: italic">in ipsa
legunt qui literas nesciunt</hi>, and further on says: <hi rend="font-style: italic">pro lectione pictura
est</hi>. When Cebes, a Theban, wished to write an opinion of his
for a law of human life, he simulated and painted it on a 'panel,'
as he thought that he would express it better thus, and that
it would be more noble and more easily understood by all
men; he then desired more to know how to paint, in order
to speak, than how to write. But even, if after all this, poetry
still affirms that a Venus painted at the feet of a Jupiter does
not speak, nor Turnus painted, showing his valour before King
Latinus, even this reason cannot render learned painting
dumb so that she does not speak, and show in all things that
she is in this also the first, or perhaps the companion, of my
lady poetry. For the great painter will paint Venus weeping
at the feet of Jupiter, with all the following advantages,
<pb n="303" /><anchor id="Pg303" />which the poet will not have: the first one is that he paints
heaven where it is supposed to be, and the person, dress, and
action or movement of Jupiter and his eagle with the
thunderbolt; and he will paint fully the luxurious beauty of
Venus, and her robe of gauzy raiment with all her graceful
movements, so elegant and light and with such skill that,
although she may not speak with her mouth, yet it appears
from her eyes, hands, and mouth that she is really speaking
(nor do you hear the soft and sweet speech of Venus, when a
croaking school-master reads the words and sayings of Venus).
She appears to be uttering all those pious sayings and complaints
which Virgil Maro writes concerning her. And also
the great painter will make even King Latinus more copious
in his work and the Councillors of the Laurentes more defined,
clearer, some with perturbed face, and others more collected
and quiet, different in appearance and physiognomy and age,
different in movements, which the poet cannot do without
too much prolixity and confusion. And even then he will
not do it; and the painter will do it so that it may be seen
with greater pleasure and move the spectator more, and likewise
he will place before your eyes the brave image of Turnus,
boastful and furious with the coward Drances, that it seems
as if you fear him yourself and that he is saying: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Larga
quidem semper, Drance, tibi copia fandi</hi>. Therefore I with my
small talent, as a pupil of a mistress without a tongue, still
deem the power of painting to be greater than that of poetry
in making greater effects and in having more force and
vehemence whether to move mind and soul to joy and
laughter, or to sorrow and tears, with more effective eloquence.
But let the muse Calliope be the judge in this matter, for I
will be content with her judgment."</p>

<p>And having said that I ceased. The Marchioness honoured
me in bantering terms thus:</p>

<p>"You, Senhor Francisco, have done so well for your
<pb n="304" /><anchor id="Pg304" />innamorata, painting, that, if Master Michael does not show
just as great a sign of love for her, we may perhaps get her
to divorce him and go with you to Portugal."</p>

<p>And, smiling, Michael said: "He knows, Madam, that I
have already done so, and that I have already released her
entirely to him; for as I do not possess such powers as such
great love demands, he has said what he has said, as of one
who belongs to him."</p>

<p>"I confess," said I, "Madam, that he has released her to
me, but she does not wish to go with me, so that she still
remains at home with him; neither would I, although she is
so worthy, like to see her come to my country, for there are
but few there who know how to esteem her, and my most
serene king, unless it were in his unoccupied moments, would
not favour her, especially if there happened to be any unrest
through war, in which she is of no use; and so she would
become angry and perhaps in a fit of temper she would one
day throw herself into the ocean, which is hard by, and cause
me to sing many times the verse:</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Audieras: et fama fuit; sed opera tantum</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">nostra valent, Lycida, tela inter maria, quantum</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">chaonias dicunt aquila veniente columbas.</l>
</lg>

<p>But if she were of use in time of war, I would desire her to
come at once."</p>

<p>"I quite understand," said the Marchioness, "but as now
the day is far spent, let your question be for next Sunday."
And as she said this she rose, and all of us with her, and we
went away.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="305" /><anchor id="Pg305" /><head>THIRD DIALOGUE</head>

<p>Not only were we unable to meet together on the following
Sunday with the Marchioness and M. Angelo, but even on the
next one, eight days later, we were almost prevented, and indeed
did not wish to meet, because at that time was being
celebrated in the city of Rome the feast of the twelve
triumphal cars in the Camp Nagao<note place="foot"><p>Piazza Navona?</p></note> in the ancient manner.
Starting from the Capitol with such magnificence and ancient
pomp that it seemed as if one were back in the old times of
the Emperors and the triumphs of the Romans. This feast
was celebrated on the occasion of the marriage<note place="foot"><p>In 1538.</p></note> of Senhor
Ottavio,<note place="foot"><p>Ottavio Farnese.</p></note> son of Pedro Luiz, and grand-nephew of our Lord
Pope Paul III., to Senhora Margarida,<note place="foot"><p>Margarite of Austria, natural daughter of Charles V.</p></note> adopted daughter of
the Emperor. She had been a short time previously the wife
of Alessandro de Medici, Duke of Florence, who was killed
through treason in Florence. And now, she being a widow
and very young and beautiful, his Holiness and his Majesty
married her to Senhor Ottavio, a very young and estimable
man, consequently the city and the Court feasted them as
much as could be at night with serenades and banquets, and
the whole of Rome ablaze with lights and illuminations, especially
the Castle of St. Angelo, and every day feasts and
great expenditure. Such as the feast of Monte Trestacho,
with its twenty bulls attached to twenty carts, killed as a
public spectacle in the square of St. Peter's; and the race
which was run between buffaloes and horses along the entire
Via di Nostra Signora Transpontina to the square of the said
palace. And also those festivals which I have mentioned of
the twelve triumphal cars, gilded and ornamented with many
fine figures and very noble devices; there were Romans and
<pb n="306" /><anchor id="Pg306" />the heads of the districts of Rome, dressed in the old style,
with all the pomp and pride that could be desired; one hundred
sons of citizens on horseback, so brave and so bizarre
in their gallantry of painted antiquity, that in comparison
with them the velvet mantles and plumes and the infinity of
novelties and costumes in which Italy exceeds every other
province of Europe, appeared very ordinary. But when I had
seen this noble phalanx and company descending from the
Capitol with many infantry, and had viewed all the bravery of
the cars and the ediles, dressed in the old fashion, and had seen
Senhor Giulio Cesarino pass with the standard of the city of
Rome, on a horse with trappings covered with a white coat of
arms and black brocade, I at once turned my horse towards
Monte Cavallo, and thus went riding along the Thermae road
pondering over many things of the olden times, in which I
then felt myself to be more than in the present.</p>

<p>Then I ordered my servant to go without fail to St. Silvester
and learn whether perchance the Marchioness or Senhor
M. Angelo happened to be there. The servant was not long
in returning, telling me that Senhor M. Angelo and Senhor
Lactancio and Brother Ambrose were all together in the friar's
cell, which was itself in St. Silvester, but that no mention
whatever had been made of the Marchioness. I went on
towards St. Silvester, but the truth is that I intended to pass
before it and to return to the city, when I saw coming a certain
Çapata, a great servitor of the Marchioness, and a very honourable
person and my friend. I being on horseback and he on
foot, I was obliged to dismount; and he having told me that
he had been sent by the Marchioness, we went into St. Silvester.
As we were entering Senhores, M. Angelo and M. Lactancio
were coming out by way of the garden or court, in order
to take their siesta under the trees by the running water.</p>

<p>"Oh! welcome," said Senhor Lactancio, "both of you; you
could not arrive at a better moment; you have been very wise
<pb n="307" /><anchor id="Pg307" />to fly from the confusion in the city and take shelter in this
quiet haven."</p>

<p>"That is all very well," we said, "but this flattery does not
console us, nor is it sufficient to compensate us for the loss of
the absent one."</p>

<p>"He said that for the Marchioness," said Senhor Michael,
"and you are so far right, that if you had not come this instant
I might have gone."</p>

<p>Conversing thus we sat down on a stone bench in the garden
at the foot of some laurels, on which there was room for all of
us, and we were very comfortable, leaning back against the
green ivy which covered the wall, and from there we could see
a good part of the city, very graceful and full of ancient
majesty.</p>

<p>"Let us not lose everything," said Senhor Çapata, after
making excuses for the Marchioness; "let us get some profit
out of such a goodly assembly as we have here; please continue
the same noble discussion which you held a few days ago, on
the most noble art of painting, seeing that the Marchioness
very reluctantly commissioned me to that end, for she herself
would have liked to be present. But you must know that she
sent me here to report to her everything stored in my memory,
to relate to her everything treated of, without losing a single
point. And therefore we are bound, gentlemen, I to hear and
to be silent about what I do not understand, and you to give
me something to remember and report."</p>

<p>"Senhor Michael," I answered, "must fulfil the wishes of
the Marchioness when she heard me in the last discussion, and
practically promised to show me whether painting would be
entirely useless in time of war, for I remember that her Excellency
named last Sunday, in which we did not meet, for that
purpose."</p>

<p>Here M. Angelo laughed, and added:</p>

<p>"So you, M. Francisco, expect the Marchioness to have as
<pb n="308" /><anchor id="Pg308" />much power when absent as when present. Well, as you have
so much faith in her, I do not wish you to lose it through
me."</p>

<p>All said that it would be well, and then M. Angelo began
to say:</p>

<p>"And what is there more profitable in the business and
undertaking of war, or what is of more use in the operations
of sieges and assaults than painting? Do you not know that
when Pope Clement and the Spaniards besieged Florence, it was
only by the work and virtue of the painter M. Angelo that
the besieged were defended a good while, not to say, the city
released, and the captains and soldiers outside were for a good
while astonished and oppressed and killed through the defences
and strongholds which I made on the tower, lining them in
one night on the outside with bags of wool and other materials,
emptying them of earth and filling them with fine powder,
with which I burnt a little the blood of the Castillians, whom
I sent through the air torn in pieces? So that I consider great
painting as not only profitable in war, but exceedingly necessary;
for the engines and instruments of war and for catapults,
rams, mantlets, testudines, and iron-shod towers and bridges,
and (as this bad and iron time does not make any use of these
arms now, but rejects them) mortars; for the shaping of
the mortars, battering-rams, strengthened cannons, and arquebuses,
and especially for the shape and proportions of all
fortresses and rocks, bastions, strongholds, fences, mines,
countermines, trenches, loop-holes, casemates; for the entrenchments
for horsemen, ravelins, gabions, battlements, for
the invention of bridges and ladders, for the emplacement of
camps, for the order of the lines, measurement of the
squadrons, for the difference and design of arms, for the
designs of the banners and standards, for the devices on the
shields and helmets, and also for new coats of arms, crests
and medals which are given on the field to those who show
<pb n="309" /><anchor id="Pg309" />great prowess, for the painting of trappings (I mean, the giving
of instruction to other lesser painters as to how they ought
to be painted, and seeing that the excellent painters can
paint the trappings of the horses and the shields and even
the tents for valorous princes); for the manner of dividing
and selecting everything; for the description and assortment
of the colours and liveries, which but few can determine.
Moreover, drawing is of exceedingly great use in war to show
in sketches the position of distant places and the shape of
the mountains and the harbours, as well as that of the ranges
of mountains and of the bays and seaports, for the shape of
the cities and fortresses, high and low, the walls and the
gates and their position, to show the roads and the rivers,
the beaches and the lagoons and marshes which have to be
avoided or passed; for the course and spaces of the deserts
and sandy pits of the bad roads and of the woods and forests;
all this done in any other way is badly understood, but by
drawing and sketching all is very clear and intelligible; all of
these are great things in warlike undertakings, and the
drawings of the painter greatly aid and assist the intentions
and plans of the captain. What better thing can any brave
cavalier do than show before the eyes of the raw and inexperienced
soldiers the shape of the city that they have to
attack before they approach it, what river, what mountains
and what towns have to be passed on the morrow? And
the Italians, at least, say that, if the Emperor when he entered
Provence had first ordered the course of the river
Rodano to be drawn, he would not have sustained such great
losses, nor retired his army in disorder, nor would he have been
painted afterwards in Rome as a crab, which crawls sideways,
with the words borne by the columns of Hercules, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Plus ultra</hi>,
for, wishing to go forward, he went back. And I well believe
that Alexander the Great in his great undertakings frequently
made use of the skill of Apelles, even if he himself did not
<pb n="310" /><anchor id="Pg310" />know how to draw. And in the works and commentaries,
written by the monarch Julius Cæsar, we may see how much
he availed himself of drawing, through some capable man
whom he had in his army. And I even think that the said
Cæsar was extremely intelligent in painting, that the great
Captain Pompey drew very well and with style, he being
vanquished by Cæsar, as Cæsar was a better draughtsman.
And I assert that a modern captain who commands a great
army and who is not capable and intelligent in painting and
cannot draw, cannot do any great feats or deeds of arms; and
that he who understands and esteems it will do deeds of
renown which will be long remembered, and will know his
ways and how he stands, and how and where he will
break through, and how he will order his retreat, and he
will know how to make his victory appear much greater.
For painting in war is not only advantageous but very necessary.
What country warmed by the sun is more bellicose and
better armed than our Italy, or where are there more continuous
wars and greater routs and sieges? and in what
country warmed by the sun is painting more esteemed and
celebrated than in Italy?"</p>

<p>M. Angelo was already reposing when João Çapata said:</p>

<p>"It indeed seems to me, Master Michael, that in arming
excellently Francisco d'Ollanda's lady you disarmed the
Emperor Charles, not remembering that we here are more
Colonna than Orsino. I do not wish to revenge myself for
that except by asking you, since you have shown the worth
of painting in war, to now say what it can do in peace,
because it appears to me that you have said so many
profitable things of it in the time of arms that I doubt
whether you will find as many in the time of the toga."</p>

<p>He laughed and answered:</p>

<p>"Your Excellency will please not to count me as an Orsino.
You will remember how I at once became one of those columns
<pb n="311" /><anchor id="Pg311" />that the crab was going to seek;" and afterwards he
added:</p>

<p>"If it was a trouble for me to show the advantage of this
our art in time of war, I hope it will not be so to show its
worth in the time of the toga and of peace; then princes are
in the habit of availing themselves with pleasure and cost of
things of very little importance and almost of no value at all;
and we see that some men are so clever in idle things that
by works of no nobility or profit, and without any learning
or substance, they are able to acquire a name, honour, profit
and substance for themselves and loss to whomsoever may give
them their profit. We see that in the domains and states
which are governed by a senate and republic they make
much use of painting in public places, in the cathedrals, in the
temples, in halls of justice, in courts, porticos, basilicas and
palaces, in libraries, and generally for public ornament; and
every noble citizen has privately in his palaces or chapels,
country seats or 'vignas,' a good portion of painting. But as
it is not lawful in such a country for any one to make more
show than his neighbour, by giving commissions to painters
so as to make themselves out rich and well-to-do, with how
much more reason ought this profitable art and science to be
made use of in the obedient and peaceful kingdoms where
God permits one man to incur all these magnificent expenses
and carry out all the sumptuous works that his taste and
honour may desire and demand, particularly as it is such a
generous art that one person can do alone and without any
adviser what many men together cannot do? And a prince
would be doing a great wrong to himself&mdash;to say nothing of
the fine arts&mdash;if, when he obtains quietness and saintly peace,
he does not undertake great enterprises in painting both
for the ornamentation and glory of his estate and for his
private contentment and the recreation of his mind. And
then in times of peace there are so many things in which
<pb n="312" /><anchor id="Pg312" />painting may be of use, that it seems to me that peace is
obtained with so much labour of arms, for nothing else but in
order to do her work, and carry out enterprises with the quiet
which she merits and demands, after the great services she
has rendered in war. For what name will remain alive in
consequence of a great victory or a great feat of arms, if
afterwards, when quiet comes, it be not kept in perpetual
memory (a thing so important and necessary amongst men),
by virtue of painting and architecture, in arches, triumphs
and tombs, and in many other ways. And Augustus Cæsar
departed not from my saying when, during the universal
peace in all lands, he closed the doors of the Temple of Janus,
because in closing those doors of iron he opened the doors of
gold of the treasures of the Empire, in order to spend more
largely in peace than he had done even in war; and perhaps
amongst such ambitious and magnificent works as those with
which he ornamented Mount Palatine and the Forum, he
paid as much for a figure in painting as he would have paid
to a regiment of soldiers in a month. So that the peace of
great princes should be desired in order that they may give
their country great works in painting for the ornamentation
of their estate and their glory, and receive from them spiritual
and special contentments and beautiful things to behold."</p>

<p>"I do not know, Senhor Michael," said I, "how you will
prove to me that Augustus paid as much for a painted figure
as he would pay to a regiment of soldiers for a month; if
you were to say that in Spain it would be more difficult to
believe you, than if you said that there were such bad
painters in Italy that they painted the Emperor with the legs
of a crab and with the label, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Plus ultra</hi>!"</p>

<p>Senhor Michael laughed once more, without the Marchioness,
and afterwards said:</p>

<p>"I well know that in Spain people do not pay so well
for painting as in Italy, and therefore you will be surprised
<pb n="313" /><anchor id="Pg313" />at the great sums paid for it, as you are only accustomed
to small sums; and I have been well informed of this by a
Portuguese servant that I had, and therefore painters live
and exist here, and not in the Spains. Of the Spaniards, the
finest nobility in the whole world, you will find some who
applaud and praise and like painting to a certain extent, but
on pressing them further, they have no mind to order even a
small work, nor to pay for it; and, what I consider baser still
they are astonished when they are told that there are persons
in Italy who give good prices for paintings; indeed, in my
judgment they do not act in this like such noble people as
they say they are, even though it were for nothing else but
not to undervalue that which they have no experience of and
cannot do; it recoils on their own head, however, they demean
themselves and disgrace the nobility of which they boast;
and not indeed that virtue, which will always be esteemed so
long as there are men here in Italy and in this city. And
for this reason a painter ought not to desire to be away from
this land in which we are; and you, M. Francisco d'Ollanda,
if you hope to be appreciated through the art of painting in
Spain or in Portugal, I tell you at once that you are living in
a vain and false hope, and that in my judgment you ought
rather to live in France or in Italy, where talent is recognised
and great painting is much esteemed, because you will find
here private persons and gentlemen, even those who at
present do not take much pleasure in painting, as for instance
Andrea Doria, who nevertheless had his palace painted
magnificently, and magnificently paid Master Perino his
painter; and like Cardinal Fernes, who does not know what
painting is, but who made a very nice allowance to the said
Master Perino, merely to call him his painter, giving him
twenty 'cruzados' per month and rations for him and for a
horse and servant, besides paying him very well for his works.
See what Cardinal Della Valla or Cardinal de Cesis did.
<pb n="314" /><anchor id="Pg314" />Likewise Pope Paul, who, although not very musical nor
interested in painting, yet treats me well, and at least better
than I ask; and then there is Urbino, my servant, to whom he
gives solely for grinding my colour ten 'cruzados' a month
besides rations in the palace. I say nothing of his vain
favours and kindnesses, of which I sometimes feel ashamed.
Now, what shall I say of the diverting Sebastian Veneziano?
to whom (although he did not come at a favourable time) the
Pope gave the Leaden Seal, with the honour and profit which
appertain to that office, without the lazy painter having
painted more than two things in Rome, which will not astonish
Senhor Francisco much. So that in this our country, even
those who do not esteem painting greatly, pay for it much
better than those who are greatly delighted with it in Spain
or Portugal; and therefore I advise you as a son that you
ought not to depart from Italy, because I fear that if you do
you will repent it."</p>

<p>"I thank, you, Senhor Michael Angelo, for your advice," I
said to him, "but still I am serving the King of Portugal,
and in Portugal I was born and hope to die, and not in Italy.
But as you make such a difference in the value of painting
in Italy and in Spain, do me the favour of teaching me how
painting ought to be valued, because I am in this matter
so scandalised that I do not trust myself to value any
work."</p>

<p>"What do you call valuing?" he replied. "Do you wish
the painting which we are discussing to be paid for according
to a valuation, or do you think that any one knows how to
value it? for I consider that work to be worth a great price
which has been done by the hand of a very capable man, even
though in a short time; if it were done in a very long time
who will know how to value it? And I hold that to be of
very little value which has been painted in many years by a
person who does not know how to paint, although he be
<pb n="315" /><anchor id="Pg315" />called a painter; for works ought not to be esteemed because
of the amount of time employed and lost in the labour, but
because of the merit of the knowledge and of the hand which
did them; for if it were not so, they would not pay more to a
lawyer for an hour's examination of an important case, than to
a weaver for as much cloth as he may weave during the
course of his whole life, or to a navvy who is bathed in sweat
the whole day by his work. By such variation nature is
beautiful, and that valuation is very foolish which is made by
one who does not understand the good or the bad in the work:
some paintings worth little are valued highly, and others,
which are worth more, do not even pay for the care with
which they are done or for the discomfort that the painter
himself experiences when he knows that such persons have
to value his work, or for the exceeding disgust he feels asking
for payment from an unappreciative treasurer.</p>

<p>"It does not seem to me that the ancient painters were
content with your Spanish payments and valuations; and I
certainly think they were not, for we find that some were so
magnificently liberal that, knowing that there was not sufficient
money in the country to pay for their works, they presented
them liberally for nothing, having spent on such work,
labour of their mind, time and money. Such were Zeuxis,
Heracleotes and Polygnotus Thasius and others. And there
were others of a more impatient nature who used to waste
and break up the works that they had done with so much
trouble and study, on seeing that they were not paid for as
they deserved; like the painter who was commanded by
Cæsar to paint a picture, and having asked a sum of money
for it that Cæsar would not give, perhaps in order to effect
his intention the better, the painter took the picture and
was about to break it up, his wife and children around him
bemoaning such great loss; but Cæsar then delighted him, in
a manner proper to a Cæsar, giving him double the sum which
<pb n="316" /><anchor id="Pg316" />he had previously asked, telling him that he was a fool if he
expected to vanquish Cæsar."</p>

<p>"Now, Senhor Michael," said João Çapata, a Spaniard,
"one thing I cannot understand in the art of painting: it is
customary at times to paint, as one sees in many places in
this city, a thousand monsters and animals, some of them
with faces of women and with legs and with tails of fishes,
and others with arms like tigers' legs, and others with men's
faces; in short, painting that which most delights the painter
and which was never seen in the world."</p>

<p>"I am pleased," said Michael, "to tell you why it is usual
to paint that which was never seen in the world, and how
right such licence is, and how true it is, for some who do not
understand him are accustomed to say that Horace, a lyric
poet, wrote this verse in abuse of painters:</p>

<lg>
<l rend='text-indent: 10'>Pictoribus adque poetis</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Quidlibet audendi semper fuit acqua potestas.</l>
<l rend="text-indent: 2">Scimus et hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.</l>
</lg>

<p>This verse does not in any way insult painters, but rather
praises and honours them; for it says that poets and painters
have power to dare, I mean to dare to do whatever they may
approve of; and this good insight and this power they have
always had, for whenever a great painter (which very seldom
happens) does a work which appears to be false and lying, that
falsity is very true, and if he were to put more truth into it
it would be a lie, as he will never do a thing which cannot be
in itself, nor make a man's hand with ten fingers, nor paint
on a horse the ears of a bull or the hump of a camel, nor will
he paint the foot of an elephant with the same feeling as for
that of a horse, nor in the arm or face of a child will he put
the senses of an old man, nor an ear nor an eye out of its
place by as much as the thickness of a finger, nor is he even
permitted to place a hidden vein in an arm anywhere he
likes; for such things as these are very false. But should he,
<pb n="317" /><anchor id="Pg317" />in order better to retain the decorum of the place and time,
alter some of the limbs (as in grotesque work, which without
that would indeed be without grace and therefore false) or a
part of one thing into another species such as to change a
griffin or a deer from the middle downwards into a dolphin,
or from thence upwards into any figure he may wish, putting
wings instead of arms, putting off arms if wings suit it better,
that limb which he changes, whether of a lion, horse or
bird, will be quite perfect of the species to which it belongs;
and this although it may appear false can only be called well
imagined and monstrous. The reason is it is better decoration
when, in painting, some monstrosity is introduced for
variety and a relaxation of the senses and to attract the
attention of mortal eyes, which at times desire to see that
which they have never yet seen, nor does it appear to them
that it can be more unreasonable (although very admirable)
than the usual figures of men or animals. And so it is that
insatiable human desire took licence and neglected at times
buildings with columns and windows and doors for others
imitated in false grotesque, the columns of which are made of
children springing from the leaves of flowers, with the architraves
and summit of branches of myrtle and gates of canes
and other things, which appear to be very impossible and
out of reason, and yet all this is very grand if done by one
who understands it."</p>

<p>He ended, and I said:</p>

<p>"Does it not seem to you, Senhor, that this feigned work
is much more suitable for ornament in its proper place (such
as a country seat or a pleasure house) rather than, for instance,
a procession of friars, which is a very natural thing, or a King
David doing penance, is it not a great insult to drag him
from his oratory? And does not the god Pan playing on the
pipes, or a woman with the tail of a fish and wings (which is
seldom seen), appear to you to be a more suitable painting for
<pb n="318" /><anchor id="Pg318" />a garden or for a fountain? And it is a much greater falsity
to put an imagination in a place where the real is demanded,
and this reasoning explains all the things which some call
'impossibilities' in painting. Still the obstinate will say:
'How can a woman with a beautiful face have the tail of a
fish and the legs of the swift deer or panther, with wings on
her back like an angel?' To such one may however reply
that if such nonconformity is in just proportion in all its parts
it is quite in harmony and is very natural; and that much
praise is due to the painter who painted a thing which was
never seen and is so impossible, with such wit and judgment
that it seems to be alive and possible, so that men wish that
such things did exist in the world, and say that they could
pluck feathers from those wings and that it is moving hands
and eyes. And so one who paints (as a book said) a hare
which, in order to be distinguished from the dog following it,
required a label indicating it, such a person, painting a thing
so little deceitful, may be said to paint a great falsehood,
more difficult to find amongst the perfect works of nature
than a beautiful woman with the tail of a fish and wings."</p>

<p>They agreed with what I said, even João Çapata himself,
who was not well instructed in the beauties of painting.
And Master Michael, seeing that his conversation was not
badly employed on us, said:</p>

<p>"Now what a high thing is decorum in painting! and how
little the painters who are no painters try to observe it! and
what attention the great man pays to this!"</p>

<p>"And are there painters who are not painters?" asked
João Çapata."</p>

<p>"In many places," answered the painter, "but as the
majority of people are without sense and always love that
which they ought to abhor, and blame that which deserves
most praise, it is not very surprising that they are so constantly
mistaken about painting, an art worthy only of great understandings,
<pb n="319" /><anchor id="Pg319" />because without any discretion or reason, and
without making any difference, they call a painter both the
person who has nothing more than the oils and brushes of
painting and the illustrious painter who is not born in the
course of many years (which I consider to be a very great
thing); and as there are some who are called painters and are
not painters, so there is also painting which is not painting,
for they did it. And what is marvellous is that a bad painter
neither can nor knows how to imagine, nor does he even
desire to do good painting, his work mostly differs but little
from his imagination, which is generally somewhat worse;
for if he knew how to imagine well or in a masterly manner
in his fantasy, he could not have a hand so corrupt as not to
show some part or indication of his good will. But no one
has ever known how to aspire well in this science, except the
mind which understands what good work is, and what he can
make of it. It is a serious thing, this distance and difference
which exist between the high and the low understanding in
painting."</p>

<p>At this point M. Lactancio, who had not spoken for some
time, said:</p>

<p>"I cannot suffer at all one indiscretion of bad painters, the
images which they paint without consideration or devotion
in the churches. And I should like to direct our discussion
to this end, being sure that the carelessness with which some
paint the holy images cannot be good. Work which a very
incapable painter or man dares to do, without any fear, so
ignorantly that instead of moving mortals to devotion and
tears, he sometimes provokes them to laughter."</p>

<p>"This sort of painting is a great undertaking," proceeded
M. Angelo; "in order to imitate to some extent the venerable
image of our Lord it is not sufficient merely to be a great
master in painting and very wise, but I think that it is necessary
for the painter to be very good in his mode of life, or
<pb n="320" /><anchor id="Pg320" />even, if such were possible, a saint, so that the Holy Spirit
may inspire his intellect. And we read that Alexander
the Great put a heavy penalty upon any painter other than
Apelles who should paint him, for he considered that man
alone able to paint his appearance with that severity and
liberal mind which could not be seen without being praised
by the Greeks and feared and adored by the barbarians.
And therefore if a poor man of this earth so commanded
by edict concerning his image, how much more reason have
the ecclesiastical or secular princes to take care to order
that no one shall paint the benignity and meekness of our
Redeemer or the purity of Our Lady and the Saints but the
most illustrious painters to be found in their domains and
provinces? And this would be a very famous and much
praised work in any lord. And even in the Old Testament
God the Father wished that those who only had to ornament
and paint the <hi rend="font-style: italic">arca foederis</hi> should be masters not merely
excellent and great, but also touched by His grace and
wisdom, God saying to Moses that He would imbue them
with the knowledge and intelligence of His Spirit so that
they might invent and do everything that He could invent
and do. And therefore if God the Father willed that the
ark of His Covenant should be well ornamented and painted,
how much more study and consideration must He wish applied
to the imitation of His Serene Face and that of His Son our
Lord, and of the composure, chastity and beauty of the
glorious Virgin Mary, who was painted by St. Luke the
Evangelist, the work is in the Sancto Sanctorum, and the
head of our Saviour which is in San Giovanni in Laterano, as
we all know, and especially Messer Francisco. Frequently
the images badly painted distract and cause devotion to be
lost, at least in those who possess little; and, on the contrary,
those that are divinely painted provoke and lead even
those who are little devout and but little inclined to worship
<pb n="321" /><anchor id="Pg321" />to contemplation and tears, and by their grave aspect imbue
them with reverence and fear."</p>

<p>M. Lactancio then said, having turned towards me:</p>

<p>"Why did M. Angelo say of the picture of the Saviour, 'as
we all know and especially Messer Francisco'?"</p>

<p>I answered: "Because, Senhor, he has already met me
two or three times on the road to San Giovanni Laterano,
going to obtain His grace for my salvation."</p>

<p>And I thereupon wished to cease speaking, but he desiring
me to continue, I recommenced thus:</p>

<p>"Senhor, the Most Serene Queen of Portugal, being
desirous of seeing the precious face of Our Saviour,
ordered our ambassador to have it drawn from the original,
but I, not trusting this to anybody, wished, with the desire
that I have to serve her, to dare to undertake this enterprise
myself, for it is very fine as regards execution and
no less as regards accuracy. And thus I have sent it to
her, done under such difficulties as Your Excellencies can
suspect."</p>

<p>"You cannot be a friend of the Lady Marchioness," said
João Çapata," for you did not show her a thing which is so
much to her liking; but tell me, Messer Francisco, did you
do it with that severe simplicity which the old painting has
and with that fear in those divine eyes which in the original
seem to belong to the very Saviour?"</p>

<p>"I did it that way," I said to him, "and in it I desired to
put all the truth, neither to increase nor diminish anything
of that grave severity. But I fear that this, which was my
greatest work, will be the one the least known."</p>

<p>"No it will not," answered M. Lactancio Tolomei, "as in
that they will trust to your knowledge, and it will be an
image which will lead them to build a noble temple for it. I
am astonished at your being able to reproduce and send it,
for neither the Popes nor the Brothers of San Giovanni
<pb n="322" /><anchor id="Pg322" />Laterano ever allowed the King of France or other devout
princesses to do so."</p>

<p>Then M. Angelo said:</p>

<p>"It is astonishing how M. Francisco worked, and how he
robbed Rome of this precious relic, and how he painted it
in oils, although in all his life he had never been a painter in
oils, and only made pictures hitherto easily contained on a
small parchment."</p>

<p>"How can it be," said M. Lactancio, "that one who
never painted in oils is capable of doing it, and that one who
has always done little things can also do big ones?"</p>

<p>And as I did not reply, Michael Angelo answered him:</p>

<p>"Do not be surprised, sir, and as regards this I wish now
to state my views about the noble art of painting. Let every
man who is here understand this well: design, which by
another name is called drawing, and consists of it, is the
fount and body of painting and sculpture and architecture
and of every other kind of painting, and the root of all sciences.
Let whoever may have attained to so much as to have the
power of drawing know that he holds a great treasure; he
will be able to make figures higher than any tower, either in
colours or carved from the block, and he will not be able to
find a wall or enclosure which does not appear circumscribed
and small to his brave imagination. And he will be able to
paint in fresco in the manner of old Italy, with all the mixtures
and varieties of colour usually employed in it. He will
be able to paint in oils very suavely with more knowledge,
daring and patience than painters. And, finally, on a small
piece of parchment he will be most perfect and great, as in
all other manners of painting. Because great, very great is
the power of design and drawing. Senhor Francisco d'Ollanda
can paint, if he wishes, everything that he knows how to draw."</p>

<p>"I will not ask again about another doubt," said M. Lactancio,
"because I dare not."</p>

<p><pb n="323" /><anchor id="Pg323" />"Please to dare, Your Excellency," said Michael Angelo,
"for as we have already sacrificed the day to painting, let us
likewise offer up the night which is setting in."</p>

<p>He then said: "I wish finally to know what this painting
that is so fine and rare must possess or what it is? Whether
there must be tourneys painted, or battles, or kings and
emperors covered with brocade, or well-dressed damsels, or
landscapes and fields and towns? Or whether perchance
it must be some angel or some saint painted and the actual
form of this world? Or what must it be? Whether it
must be done with gold or with silver, whether with very fine
tints or with very brilliant ones?"</p>

<p>"Painting," M. Angelo began, "is not such a great work
as any of those which you have mentioned, sir, only the painting
which I so much vaunt and praise will be the imitation
of some single thing amongst those which immortal God
made with great care and knowledge and which He invented
and painted, like to a Master: and so downwards, whether
animals or birds, dispensing perfection according as each
thing merits it. And in my judgment that is the excellent
and divine painting which is most like and best imitates any
work of immortal God, whether a human figure, or a wild
and strange animal, or a simple and easy fish, or a bird of the
air or any other creature. And this neither with gold nor
silver nor with very fine tints, but drawn only with a
pen or a pencil, or with a brush in black and white. To
imitate perfectly each of these things in its species seems
to me to be nothing else but to desire to imitate the
work of immortal God. And yet that thing will be the
most noble and perfect in the works of painting which in
itself reproduced the thing which is most noble and of the
greatest delicacy and knowledge. And what barbarous judge
is there that cannot understand that the foot of a man is more
noble than his shoe? His skin than that of the sheep from
<pb n="324" /><anchor id="Pg324" />which his clothes are made? And who from this will proceed
to find the merit and degree in everything? But I do not
mean that, because a cat or a wolf is vile, the man who paints
them skilfully has not as much merit as one who paints a horse,
or the body of a lion, as even (as I have said above) in the simple
shape of a fish there is the same perfection and proportion
as in the form of man, and I may say the same of all the world
itself with all its cities. But all must be ranked according
to the work and study which one demands more than another,
and this should be taught to some ignorant persons who
have said that some painters painted faces well but that
they could not paint anything else. Others have said that
in Flanders they painted clothes and trees extremely well, and
some have maintained that in Italy they paint the nude and
symmetry or proportions better. And of others they say
other things. But my opinion is that he who knows how
to draw well and merely does a foot or a hand or a neck, can
paint everything created in the world; and yet there are
painters who paint everything there is in the world so imperfectly
and so much without worth that it would be better
not to do it at all. One recognises the knowledge of a
great man in the fear with which he does a thing the more
he understands it. And on the contrary, the ignorance of
others in the foolhardy daring with which they fill pictures
with what they know nothing about. There may be an
excellent master who has never painted more than a single
figure, and without painting anything more deserves more
renown and honour than those who have painted a thousand
pictures: he knows better how to do what he has not done
than the others know what they do.</p>

<p>"And not only is this as I tell you, but there is another
wonder which seems greater, namely, that if a capable man
merely makes a simple outline, like a person about to begin
something, he will at once be known by it&mdash;if Apelles, as
<pb n="325" /><anchor id="Pg325" />Apelles; if an ignorant painter, as an ignorant painter. And
there is no necessity for more, neither more time, nor more
experience, nor examination, for eyes which understand it
and for those who know that by a single straight line Apelles
was distinguished from Protogenes, immortal Greek
painters."</p>

<p>And Michael Angelo having stopped, I proceeded:</p>

<p>"It is also a great thing that a great master, although he
may wish and work hard to do so, cannot so change or
injure his hand as to paint something appearing to have been
done by an apprentice, for whoever carefully examines such
a thing, will find in it some sign by which he will know that
it was done by the hand of a skilful person. And on the
contrary, one who knows little, although he may endeavour
to do the smallest thing so that it may appear to have been
done by a great man, will have his trouble in vain, because
immediately, when placed beside the work of a great man, it
will be recognised as having been done by a prentice hand.
But I should like now to know something more from Senhor
Michael Angelo, to see whether he agrees with my opinion,
and that is that he should tell me whether it is better to
paint a work quickly or slowly?"</p>

<p>And he answered:</p>

<p>"I will tell you: to do anything quickly and swiftly is very
profitable and good, and it is a gift received from the immortal
God to do in a few hours what another is painting during
many days; for if it were not so Pausias of Sicyon would not
work so hard in order to paint in one day the perfection of a
child in a picture. If he who paints quickly does not on that
account paint worse than one who paints slowly, he deserves
therefore much greater praise. But should he through the
hurry of his hand pass the limits which it is not right to pass
in art, he ought rather to paint more slowly and studiously;
for an excellent and skilful man is not entitled to allow his
<pb n="326" /><anchor id="Pg326" />taste to err through his haste when thereby some part is forgotten
or neglected of the great object perfection, which is
what must be always sought; hence it is not a vice to work
a little slowly or even to be very slow, nor to spend much
time and care on works, if this be done for more perfection;
only the want of knowledge is a defect.</p>

<p>"And I wish to tell you, Francisco d'Ollanda, of an exceedingly
great beauty in this science of ours, of which
perhaps you are aware, and which I think you consider the
highest, namely, that what one has most to work and struggle
for in painting is to do the work with a great amount of
labour and study in such a way that it may afterwards appear,
however much it was laboured, to have been done almost
quickly and almost without any labour, and very easily,
although it was not. And this is a very excellent beauty, at
times some things are done with little work in the way I have
said, but very seldom: most are done by dint of hard work
and appear to have been done very quickly.</p>

<p>"But Plutarch says in his book <hi rend="font-style: italic">De Liberis educandis</hi>, that a
poor painter showed Apelles what he was doing, telling him:
'This painting has just this moment been done by my hand,'
Apelles answered: 'Even if you had not said so I should have
known that it was by your hand and that it was done quickly,
and I am surprised that you do not do many of them every day.'</p>

<p>"However I should prefer (if one had either to err or be
correct) to err or be correct quickly rather than slowly, and
that my painter should rather paint diligently and a little
less well than one who is very slow, painting better, but
not much better.</p>

<p>"But now I wish to know this of you, M. Francisco, to
see whether you agree with my opinion, namely, that you
should tell me if there are many different ways of painting
almost of equal goodness; which of them will you consider
the worst, or which of them are bad?"</p>

<p><pb n="327" /><anchor id="Pg327" />"That is still a greater question," I replied, "Senhor Michael,
than the one I put to you; but just as Mother Nature has
produced in one place men and animals, and in another place
men and animals, all made according to one art and proportion,
and yet very different to each other, so it is, almost
miraculously, with the hands of painters, as you will find
many great men each of whom paints in his own manner and
style men and women and animals, their styles greatly differing,
and yet they all of them retain the same proportions and
principles; and yet all these different styles may be good and
worthy of being praised in their differences. For in Rome
Polidoro, a painter, had a very different style to that of
Balthazar, of Siena; M. Perino different from that of Julius, of
Mantua; Martorino did not resemble Parmesano; Cavalliere
Tiziano in Venice was softer than Leonardo da Vinci; the
sprightliness of Raphael of Urbino and his softness does not
resemble the work of Bastiāo Veneziano; your work does not
resemble any other; nor is my small talent similar to any
other. And although the famous ones whom I have mentioned
have the light and shade, the design and the
colours different from each other, they are none the less all
great and famous men, and each distinguished by his difference
and style, and their works very worthy of being valued at
almost the same price, because each of them worked to
imitate Nature and perfection in the manner that he considered
to be the most proper, and his own, and in accordance
with his idea and intention."</p>

<p>And this said, we rose and went away as it was already
night.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="329" /><anchor id="Pg329" /><head>THE WORKS OF MICHAEL ANGELO</head>

<p>The Rape of Deianira, or the Battle of the Centaurs, a bas-relief, 1490.<lb />
Casa Buonarroti, Florence.</p>

<p>The Angel of the Shrine of Saint Dominic, a marble statuette, 1494.<lb />
San Domenico, Bologna.</p>

<p>The Bacchus, a marble statue, 1497.<lb />
National Museum, Florence.</p>

<p>The Madonna della Pietà, a marble group, 1499.<lb />
St. Peter's, Rome.</p>

<p>The David, a colossal marble statue, 1504.<lb />
Accademia della Belle Arti, Florence.</p>

<p>St. Matthew, an unfinished heroic marble statue.<lb />
The Court of the Accademia delle Belle Arti, Florence.</p>

<p>The Madonna and Child, marble statue, 1506.<lb />
St. Bavon, Bruges.</p>

<p>The Madonna and Child, a tondo, marble bas-relief, unfinished.<lb />
National Museum, Florence.</p>

<p><pb n="330" /><anchor id="Pg330" />The Madonna and Child, a tondo, marble bas-relief, unfinished.<lb />
The Diploma Gallery of the Royal Academy, London.</p>

<p>The Holy Family, a tondo, painted on wood.<lb />
No. 1139, The Uffizi, Florence.</p>

<p>The Moses, a heroic marble statue.<lb />
San Pietro in Vincoli, Rome.</p>

<p>The Vault of the Sistine Chapel, ceiling frescoes, 1512.<lb />
Vatican, Rome.</p>

<p>The Madonna and Infant Christ, St. John the Baptist and Angels, an unfinished painting on wood by Bugiardini, the Cartoon alone by Michael Angelo.<lb />
No. 809, The National Gallery, London.</p>

<p>The Risen Christ, a marble statue, 1521.<lb />
Santa Maria Sopra Minerva, Rome.</p>

<p>The Tombs of Lorenzo dei Medici, Duke of Urbino and Giuliano, Duc de Nemours, heroic marble statues, the figures of Day and Evening and the architecture left unfinished by the master in 1534.<lb />
New Sacristy, San Lorenzo, Florence.</p>

<p>The Madonna and Child, heroic marble statue.<lb />
New Sacristy, San Lorenzo, Florence.</p>

<p>Four Slaves, unfinished heroic marble statues.<lb />
The Grotto of the Boboli Gardens, Florence.</p>

<p>The Apollo, an unfinished marble statue.<lb />
The National Museum, Florence.</p>

<p>The Leda, a painting, damaged and restored as to the head, arms, and shoulder, 1529.<lb />
Offices of the National Gallery, London.</p>

<p><pb n="331" /><anchor id="Pg331" />The Slaves, two heroic marble statues.<lb />
Room of Renaissance Sculpture, the Louvre, Paris.</p>

<p>The Brutus, an unfinished marble bust.<lb />
The National Museum, Florence.</p>

<p>The Day of Judgment, fresco, 1541.<lb />
The Sistine Chapel, Vatican, Rome.</p>

<p>The Entombment of our Lord, an unfinished painting on wood, the figures of our Lord and the men very much repainted, the three women and the background by the master.<lb />
No. 790, the National Gallery, London.</p>

<p>The Martyrdom of St. Peter, a fresco, 1549.<lb />
Cappella Paolina, Vatican, Rome.</p>

<p>The Conversion of St. Paul, a fresco, 1549.<lb />
Cappella Paolina, Vatican, Rome.</p>

<p>The Pietà of Santa Maria del Fiore, a marble group.<lb />
The Duomo, Florence.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="332" /><anchor id="Pg332" /><head>A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL BOOKS
CONSULTED BY THE AUTHOR</head>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Berenson, Bernhard</hi>.<lb />
The Florentine Painters of the Renaissance. London and New York, 1896.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Black, Charles Christopher</hi>.<lb />
Michael Angelo Buonarroti, Sculptor, Painter and Architect. London, 1875.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Cellini, Benvenuto</hi>.<lb />
Vita di, Scritta da lui Medesimo. Firenze, 1885.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clément, Charles</hi>.<lb />
Michelangelo. London, 1880.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Condivi, Ascanio</hi>.<lb />
Vita di Michelangelo Buonarroti, Scritta da A.C. suo discepolo. Pisa, 1746. First edition Roma, 1553.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gotti, Aurelio</hi>.<lb />
Vita di Michelangelo Buonarroti. Firenze, 1875.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hasenclever, Sophie</hi>.<lb />
Saumtliche Gedichte Michelangelo's. Leipzic, 1875.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hollanda, Francesco de</hi>.<lb />
Quatro Diologos da Pintura Antigua, La Renascença Portugueza. Porto, 1896.</p>

<p><pb n="333" /><anchor id="Pg333" /><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Milanesi, Gaetano</hi>; and <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">le Docteur A Le Pileur</hi>.<lb />
Les Correspondants de Michel-Ange, i Sebastiano del Piombo. Librairie de l'Art. Paris, 1890.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Milanesi, Gaetano</hi>.<lb />
Le Lettre di Michelangelo Buonarroti, publicate coi Ricordi ed i Contratti Artistici. Firenze, 1875.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Symonds, John Addington</hi>.<lb />
The Life of Michelangelo Buonarroti. London, 1893.<lb />
The Sonnets of Michael Angelo Buonarroti and Tomaso Campanella. London, 1878.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Vasari, Giorgio</hi>.<lb />
Le Vite de' pin eccellenti Pittori, Scultori et Architetti. Bologna, 1647. And first edition, Firenze, 1550. Second edition, Firenze, 1558.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Wilson, Charles Heath</hi>.<lb />
Life and Works of Michelangelo Buonarroti. London, 1881.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="334" /><anchor id="Pg334" /><head>ERRATUM</head>

<p>Page 27, note 1, line 2, <hi rend="font-style: italic">for</hi> 1831, <hi rend="font-style: italic">read</hi> 1873</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="335" /><anchor id="Pg335" /><head>INDEX</head>



<p rend="text-indent: 0">Abel, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Academy: Florence, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Accursio: a messenger from Julius II., <ref target="Pg51">51</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Active Life; The Tomb of Julius II., <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Adam: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, note; <ref target="Pg43">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>-<ref target="Pg175">175</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Adonis, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Adrian IV.: Pope <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aginense: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Agnolo: Herald of Florence, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Agnolo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Doni<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Agostino: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Duccio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Agostino: San, the Isaiah of Raphael at, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Agnolo di Donnino: assistant, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alberigo: Marchese, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alberto: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Dürer<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Albertina: Vienna, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Albertini: his statement, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Albizzi: Anton Francesco degli, portrait by Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alcibiades, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aldobrandini: sword-hilt designed for, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aldovrandi: Gian Francesco, his kindness to the master, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aldovrandi: Ulisse, sees a statue of Apollo, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alessandro da Carnossa, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>, note<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alessandro de' Medici: <lb />
Duke, his ill-will to the master, <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;<lb />
flight, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>; <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alexander the Great, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>, <ref target="Pg320">320</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alexander VI.: Pope, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alfonso: Duke of Ferrara, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Alva: Duke of, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aman, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Amanati: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Bartolomeo<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ambrosio: Brother, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>-<ref target="Pg274">274</ref>; <ref target="Pg289">289</ref>, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Anatomy: <lb />
studies at Santo Spirito, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;<lb />
of animals as well as man, <ref target="Pg75">75</ref>;<lb />
dissection and a treatise upon it, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ancestors of Christ: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Andrea del Sarto, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, note; <lb />
studies the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Angel: for the Shrine of San Domenico, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Angelico: Fra, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Angeli: S.M. degli, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Anna: the Beautiful, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Antonio: a servant, successor to Urbino, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Antonio: Maria da Legnia, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Antonio: <lb />
San, copy, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;<lb />
Cartoon for Mineghella, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Antonio: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Mini<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Apelles, <ref target="Pg278">278</ref>, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>; <ref target="Pg320">320</ref>, <ref target="Pg325">325</ref>, <ref target="Pg326">326</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Apollo: in the Bargello, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Arcadelt: Giacomo, sets the master's madrigals to music, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aretino, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Arezzo: fortifications at, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Arno, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>; <lb />
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Cartoon<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Arrigo Fiamingo: fresco, Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ascanio: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Condivi<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Assumption: by Daniele, with a portrait of the master, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Assunta: oratory of, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Athletes: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, note; <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>-<ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Athens, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Attalante, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Avignon, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bacchus: carved in Rome, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Baccio d'Agnolo, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="336" /><anchor id="Pg336" />Baglioni: the traitor, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Baldassare: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Peruzzi<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Baldassari: del Milanese, buys the god of Love, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bandinelli: Baccio, studies the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;<lb />
Hercules and Cacus, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bandini: Francesco, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Baptistry: Florence, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bargello: <lb />
Florence, mask of a faun, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>;<lb />
Tondo, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;<lb />
Apollo, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>;<lb />
Brutus, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bartolomei: Messer, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bartolomeo: Amanati, letter to, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bartolommea: widow of Buonarroto, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bas-relief: Florentine love of, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bassano, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bathers: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Cartoon<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Battista Benti: carves details in the Tomb of Julius II., <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Battista del Cinque: carpenter, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Batista Lorenzi, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Beatrice: of Mantua, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Beaumont: Sir George, presents a tondo to the Royal Academy, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Belvedere: works ordered by Julius III., <ref target="Pg78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Beinbo, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bene: Benedetto, copies the Leda, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bentivogli: <lb />
law, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref>;<lb />
return to Bologna, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Benvenuto: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Cellini<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bernardo Cencio: Canon of St. Peter's, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bernardo da Bibbiena, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bernardo della Ciecha, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Berlin, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bertoldo: the master of Michael Angelo in Sculpture, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Berugetta: Alonso, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Biagio da Cesena: objects to nude figures, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bibbiena: Cardinal, rebukes Cardieri, l7<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bible: <lb />
the master's study, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>;<lb />
of Raphael, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bini: Bernardo, trustee for the Tomb, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Blois: Chateau, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Boboli Gardens: the grotto with four statues, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Boccaccio, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bologna: <lb />
flight to, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref>-20;<lb />
with Julius II. at, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>;<lb />
conversations at, <ref target="Pg90">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>;<lb />
the Colossal Bronze destroyed, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bonasoni: <lb />
Giulio, engravings, a Pietà, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>;<lb />
portrait of the master, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bonifazio: Count, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bononiensis: Tudius, engraves a Pietà, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Boon companions: of the master, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Borgerini: Pier Francesco, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Borghini: Don Vincenzo, opens the coffin, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Borgia: Cesare, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Valentino<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Borgo, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Botticelli: <lb />
Sandro, letter addressed to him, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>; <lb />
Popes and histories by, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bramante: <lb />
destroys S. Petronilla, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>;<lb />
Tomb of Julius, <ref target="Pg31">31</ref>;<lb />
his errors, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;<lb />
rebuilding of S. Peter's, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref>;<lb />
suggests the painting of the vault, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>;<lb />
and Raphael to finish it, <ref target="Pg47">47</ref>;<lb />
his shortcomings, <ref target="Pg48">48</ref>;<lb />
scaffold, <ref target="Pg82">82</ref>;<lb />
has the Pope's ear in Rome, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
vault painting, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;<lb />
"a brave architect," <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>-<ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brancacci Chapel: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Masaccio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brazen Serpent: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>; <ref target="Pg178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">British Museum: <lb />
drawings, advice to Mini, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>;<lb />
for the tombs, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bronze-coloured figures: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brothers of the master: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Buonarroto, Giovan Simone, Sigismondo <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bruciolo: invites the master to Venice, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bruges, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brunelleschi: <lb />
the lantern of, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>;<lb />
his dome, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brutus: <lb />
bust of, Bargello, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>;<lb />
nickname of Lorenzino, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buggiardini: <lb />
Giuliano assistant, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>;<lb />
paints the master's portrait, and a Madonna and Child from a cartoon of the master's, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buonarroti: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Michael Angelo<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buonarroti: <lb />
Casa, bas-reliefs in, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>; <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>;<lb />
presented to Florence, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>;<lb />
wax models of the David, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buonarroti: Senator Filippo, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buonarroto: <lb />
brother of the master, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>;<lb />
established in business, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>;<lb />
letters to, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>;<lb />
his health, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;<lb />
dies of the plague in the master's arms, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Buoninsegna: Domenico, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="337" /><anchor id="Pg337" />Cain, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Calcagni: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Tiberio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Camerino: Duke of, writes to the master, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Campidoglio: <lb />
plans of the master, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>;<lb />
his portrait there, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Campo Santo: Pisa, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Canossa, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>-5<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Çapata: João, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref>, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>, <ref target="Pg316">316</ref>, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref>, <ref target="Pg321">321</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Capitol: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Campidoglio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Capponi: Niccolo, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Caprese: the master born at, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cardiere: improvisatore, his dream, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carlino: chamberlain, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carlo degli Albizzi, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Caro: Annibal, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carota: woodcarver, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carpi: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carrara, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg53">53</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cartoon of Pisa, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>;<lb />
Vasari's account, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;<lb />
Cellini's, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cassandra Ridolfi: marries Leonardo, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Caterina: Santa, <ref target="Pg31">31</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Catherine de' Medici: letter from, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cavalcani, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cavalcanti: altar of, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cavalieri: <lb />
Tomaso dei, a friend, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>;<lb />
drawings for, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>;<lb />
letter from, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cellini: <lb />
Benvenuto, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>;<lb />
describes the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Centaurs: battle of, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Deianira<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cesena: Bishop of, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Charles: the Emperor, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Charon, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Chigi, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Chiostro Verde: S.M. Novella, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Christ: <lb />
on the Cross, modelled for Mineghella, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;<lb />
taken down from the Cross, Vittoria Colonna, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>;<lb />
the Risen, in the Minerva, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>-<ref target="Pg189">189</ref>;<lb />
a statuette, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ciapino: carpenter, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cioli: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Valerio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Clement VII: <lb />
Pope, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>;<lb />
Medici Library, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>;<lb />
clemency, <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>;<lb />
Medici Tombs, <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>;<lb />
recalls the master to Rome, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg64">64</ref>;<lb />
orders the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg64">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>;<lb />
the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>;<lb />
elected Pope, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>-<ref target="Pg192">192</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>;<lb />
his postscript, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;<lb />
and curious commission, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>;<lb />
besieged in St. Angelo, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>;<lb />
anger abates, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Colombo: Realdo, anatomist, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Colonna: <lb />
Vittoria, Marchioness of Pescara, poetry, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref>;<lb />
a Christ made for her, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>;<lb />
the master is enamoured of her divine spirit, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>;<lb />
visits her death-bed, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>;<lb />
drawings and sonnets for her, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>;<lb />
conversations at St. Silvester, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>-<ref target="Pg304">304</ref>, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref>-<ref target="Pg308">308</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Colossus: a proposed, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Condivi: Ascanio della Ripa, the Life by, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>-93, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Connétable: de Montmorenci, and the Slaves, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Consiglio: a mercer, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Consiglio: Cartoon for the Sala del, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Constantinople: <lb />
the designs to throw a bridge from Pera to, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>;<lb />
is invited to, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Contemplative Life: Tomb of Julius II., <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>-<ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Contracts: <lb />
for the Madonna della Pietà of St. Peter's, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>;<lb />
the David, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>;<lb />
and the Risen Christ, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Conversion of St. Paul, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cornelia: wife of Urbino, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Correggio: perfected Melozzo's method, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cortono: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cosimo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Medici<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cosmo: St., <ref target="Pg194">194</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Creation: <lb />
the, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>;<lb />
of Eve, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>;<lb />
of man, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Adam<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Creator: the, Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Crispo: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Croce: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Santa Croce<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cronaca: Il, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Crucifixion: <lb />
in wood for Santo Spirito, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;<lb />
drawings, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>;<lb />
by Daniele, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cuio: Capitano, the master sups with, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cupid: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Love<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Damino: St., <ref target="Pg194">194</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dandolo: Marco, opinion of Baglioni, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Daniele da Volterra, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>-<ref target="Pg253">253</ref>;<lb />
writes for the master and acts as executor, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>-<ref target="Pg259">259</ref>, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dante, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;<lb />
the master's special devotion to, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="338" /><anchor id="Pg338" />Danti: Vincenzio, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">David and Goliath: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">David: <lb />
the bronze, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>;<lb />
sent to France, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">David: <lb />
the colossal statue, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>;<lb />
the contract, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>;<lb />
contemporary account of the transport, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>;<lb />
removed to the Academy, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dawn: marble statue in the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Day: marble statue in the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Day of Judgment: <lb />
Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>;<lb />
the fresco begun, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>;<lb />
shown to the public, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>;<lb />
described, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>;<lb />
copies in the Corsini Palace, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <lb />
and in the Naples Museum, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Death: the master's sayings on, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Deianira: the rape of, a bas-relief, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Deliverances of the Chosen People, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Delphic Sibyl, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Deluge: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Flood<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Demosthenes, <ref target="Pg75">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Deposition: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Pietà<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Design: the power of, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>-<ref target="Pg298">298</ref>, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>-<ref target="Pg311">311</ref>, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref>.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Desnoyers: orders the destruction of the Leda, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Diocletian: the Baths of, a restoration, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Diognetus, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Diomede Leoni: letter to Leonardo, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dionigi: Cardinal di, orders a Pietà, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Diploma Gallery: Burlington House, the tondo, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Divina Commedia: the master's drawings for, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dome of St. Peter's, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Domenico: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Ghirlandaio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Domenico: San, Bologna, The Angel for the Shrine, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Donatello: <lb />
praised by the master, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>,<lb />
who comes under the influence of his foreman, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;<lb />
St. George, and Judith, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>;<lb />
his influence, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Donati: Federigo, physician, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Donato: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Giannoti<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Doni: Agnolo, the tondo painted for, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Doria: <lb />
Andrea, project for his statue <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;<lb />
his portrait by Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dosso, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Drawing: <lb />
Ghirlandaio's book, <ref target="Pg8">8</ref>;<lb />
copies of old masters, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>;<lb />
for the tombs of the Medici, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>;<lb />
its power, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>-<ref target="Pg297">297</ref>;<lb />
in war, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>,<lb />
and in peace, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Duccio: Agostino, and the block of marble, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Duke of Florence, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Duoino of Florence: <lb />
the shadow of, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;<lb />
the Pietà, placed under, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dürer: Albert, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref>, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ecouen: the slaves at, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Enrico II., <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Epiphany: a cartoon, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ercole: Don, captain of Florence, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Esi, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Esther: Queen, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Euclid, <ref target="Pg75">75</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Eve, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Evening, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Expulsion, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Façade of San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fall of Man: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Farnese Palace: the cornice, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Farnese: the House of, the master's love for, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Father of the master: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Lodovico<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fattore: Il, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fattuci: <lb />
Ser Giovan Francesco, letters to, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>;<lb />
he rebukes the master for his modesty, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Faun: <lb />
a copy in marble, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>;<lb />
the Mask in the Bargello, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>, note;<lb />
a drawing in the Louvre, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>, note<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Febbre: Madonna della, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Madonna<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fernando di Gonzaga: Signer, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Femes: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ferrara: the master visits the fortifications, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ferrara: <lb />
Duke of, disposes of the Colossal Bronze, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>;<lb />
the master's visit to, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Festa: Constanza, sets the master's madrigals to music, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ficino: Masilio, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="339" /><anchor id="Pg339" />Fidelissimi: Gherardo, physician, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fight for the Standard: Leonardo da Vinci's cartoon, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Figio Vanni: Battista, Pope's agent, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Filippiuo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Lippi<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Flanders: the master's opinion of the painting of, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>-<ref target="Pg281">281</ref>, <ref target="Pg324">324</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Flood: the, Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>-<ref target="Pg173">173</ref>, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Florence, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>-6, <ref target="Pg15">15</ref>-20, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>-29, <ref target="Pg36">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg50">50</ref>, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>;<lb />
siege of, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>;<lb />
is betrayed, <ref target="Pg57">57</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>; <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;<lb />
gossip, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>; <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-<ref target="Pg114">114</ref>; <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>; <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;<lb />
the master purchases land for a studio, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>-<ref target="Pg255">255</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fontainebleau: the Leda at, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Forli: Bishop of, Pier Giovanni, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fortification: <lb />
the master made Commissary-General, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>;<lb />
the Borgo, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">France: <lb />
statue of Hercules sent to, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>;<lb />
painting in, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesca: daughter of Buonarroto, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesca: mother of the master, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesco d'Ollanda, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>-<ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesco: <lb />
San, a cartoon drawn for a barber, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;<lb />
and another for Mineghella, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesco: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Bandini and Urbino<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francesco: Urbino, da, schoolmaster, <ref target="Pg6">6</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Franciabigio: Il, studies the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francia: Il, <ref target="Pg90">90</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Francis I.: <lb />
of France buys the Leda, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;<lb />
invites the master to France, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>;<lb />
letter to, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Frizzi: Frederigo, finishes the Risen Christ, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gaeta: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Pier Luigi<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Galatea: by Raphael, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Galli: Jacopo, commissions the Bacchus, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Galli: owned the Bacchus and the little Cupid, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gallio Subelloni, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gallo: Antonio, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ganymede: a drawing, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gatta: Bartolommeo della, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gems: <lb />
engraved, shown to the master by the Magnificent, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>; <lb />
motives from intaglios, Adam, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;<lb />
Judith, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>;<lb />
Leda, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Genoa: <lb />
the master proposes to retire to, <ref target="Pg66">66</ref>;<lb />
the Senate orders a statue of Doria, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;<lb />
the medallion, Albergo dei Poveri, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">George: St., by Donatello, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Germany, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ghibelline, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ghiberti: Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ghirlandaio: <lb />
Domenico, the master's first teacher, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg8">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;  <lb />
the master leaves him, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref>;<lb />
histories in the Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ghirlandaio: <lb />
Ridolfo, Vasari's gossip, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;<lb />
worked from the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giacomo del Duca: carves details on the Tomb of Julius II., <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giacomo della Porta, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giangiacomo de' Medici: his monument at Milan, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giannotti: Donato, a friend of the master's, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giant: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> David<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gié: Maréchal de, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giorgio: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Vasari<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giotto: studies from, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni da Reggio, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni da Udine, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni dall' Opera, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni de' Marchesi: stone-carver, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni de' Medici, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni: a gem-engraver, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni: San, in Laterano, <ref target="Pg320">320</ref>, <ref target="Pg321">321</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni: Michi, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovanni: San, dei Fiorentini, designs for, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovannino: San, a, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giovan Simone: <lb />
joins Buonarroto in the cloth business, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>;<lb />
his behaviour troubles the master, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>;<lb />
a letter to him, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>;<lb />
he begins to do well, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>;<lb />
death, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Girolamo da Fano: retouches the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gismondo: <lb />
to join Buonarroto, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>;<lb />
visits Rome, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giugni: Galeotto, envoy, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giulia: La, the cannon cast from the wreck of the Bronze, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giulia: the Villa, works ordered by Julius III., <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giuliano: a marble statue in the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giuliano de' Medici: his courtesy, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Giulio Romano, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gondi: the bank of, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gondi: Filippo, hides his goods, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="340" /><anchor id="Pg340" />Gondi: Giambattista, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gonfaloniere: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Soderini<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gottifredo, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Granacci: <lb />
Francesco, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref>;<lb />
studies the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;<lb />
helps to provide assistants, his letter, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Grand Canal: a design for a bridge, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Grotesque, <ref target="Pg316">316</ref>-<ref target="Pg318">318</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Guelph, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Guidobaldo: Duke of Urbino own's the god of Love, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Guidoccione, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Haarlem: drawings in the Teyler Museum, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hawkwood: Sir John, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Henry II.: of France, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hercules: a marble statue, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hercules and Cacus, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hercules strangling Antæus: a wax model, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Holkham Hall: Cartoon at, <ref target="Pg38">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Holy Family with Shepherds, the, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Homer, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Human form: the master's love for the beauty of, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Imitators of the master, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Indaco: <lb />
Jacopo L', assistant, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>;<lb />
he grumbles, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Inscriptions, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Intaglio: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Gems<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ippolito de' Medici, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Isaiah: by Raphael, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Italian painting; the master's opinion of, <ref target="Pg280">280</ref>, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jacopo del Conte, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jacopo della Quercia: studied by the master, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jacopo di Sandro: an assistant, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jacopo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Galli, L'Indaco, Sansovino<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jean: makes a model of the Dome, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jeremiah: the Prophet, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Joel, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Jonah, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Judith, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>; <lb />
of Donatello, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Julius II.: <lb />
Pope, calls the master to Rome and orders his Tomb, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>-30, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;<lb />
offends the master, <ref target="Pg35">35</ref>, <ref target="Pg38">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
the Colossal Bronze for Bologna, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>; <lb />
it is placed on San Petronio, but is destroyed by the mob and made into a cannon, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>; <lb />
orders the Vault of the Sistine Chapel to be painted, <ref target="Pg48">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg50">50</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;<lb />
the master's love for him, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;<lb />
and his house, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;<lb />
he is satisfied, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref>;<lb />
death, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;<lb />
the Tragedy of the Tomb of, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Julius III.: <lb />
Pope, <ref target="Pg63">63</ref>; <lb />
a patron of the Arts and of the master, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref>, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>;<lb />
confirms the master in his office, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>; <lb />
death, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Julius Cæsar, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>, <ref target="Pg315">315</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">King of France gives the Slaves to Montmorenci, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <lb />
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Francis I.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lactancio Tolomei, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>-<ref target="Pg322">322</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lana: Consuls of the Arte della, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lantern: of the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lapo Antonio di Lapo: <lb />
assistant at Bologna, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>;<lb />
is dismissed, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>; <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Last Judgment: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Day of Judgment<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leda: <lb />
the, motive from a gem, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, note;<lb />
painted for the Duke of Ferrara but sent to France, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leghorn, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leicester: the Earl of, his cartoon at Holkham, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lenoir: M., purchases the Slaves for France, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leo X.: <lb />
Pope, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>; <lb />
orders the façade of San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>;<lb />
his fervour spent, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref>-<ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
death, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leone Leoni: <lb />
the monument at Milan, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>;<lb />
his medal of the master, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Letters: <lb />
from, <lb />
Catherine de' Medici, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>;<lb />
Duke of Camerino, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>; <lb />
Francesco Granacci, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>;<lb />
Lodovico, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>;<lb />
Pietro Roselli, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;<lb />
Tomaso del Cavalieri, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>.<lb />
From the master to, <lb />
Amanati, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>;<lb />
Buonarroto, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref>, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>;<lb />
Cardinal Carpi, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;<lb />
Fattucci,

<pb n="341" /><anchor id="Pg341" /><ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>;<lb />
Francis I., <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>; <lb />
Giovansimone, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>;<lb />
Lionardo, his nephew, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;<lb />
Lodovico, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>-<ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;<lb />
Lorenzo di' Pierfrancesco, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref>;<lb />
nephew of Pope Paul, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>;<lb />
Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;<lb />
Spina, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>;<lb />
Topolino, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;<lb />
Vasari, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>.<lb />
From Diomede Leoni to Lionardo, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;<lb />
from Tiberio Calcagni to Lionardo, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Library: Medici, ordered by Clement VII., <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Libyan Sibyl, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Light separated from Darkness, Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lignano: Antommaria, banks money for the Colossal Bronze, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lionardo da Vinci, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>; <lb />
his cartoon, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lionardo di Compago: saddle-maker, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lionardo: <lb />
nephew of the master, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>;<lb />
letters to, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;<lb />
marries Cassandra, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>;<lb />
receives news of the master's illness, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;<lb />
and death, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>;<lb />
orders Vasari to design the Tomb, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lippi: Filippino, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lodovico del Buono: founder, assists the master at Bologna, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lodorico di Leonardo Buonarroti Simoni, <lb />
father of the master, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg15">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>;<lb />
letters to, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>:<lb />
letter from, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Loggia dei Lanzi, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Loggia of the Vatican, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lorenzetto: worked from the cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lorenzino: nicknamed Brutus, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lorenzo: <lb />
San, the facade, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
obsequies of the master at, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lorenzo: San, the pulpits of, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Loreto, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lottino: Il, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Louis XIII: <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Louvre: the two Slaves, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Love: <lb />
a god of, in marble, made to imitate the antique, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;<lb />
a little, carved for Galli, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lucan, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lucca, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lucrezia: second wife of Lodovico, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Luiz: Infanta D., <ref target="Pg169">169</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child: a bas-relief in the Casa Buonarroti, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child: marble statue, Bruges, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child: marble statue, New Sacristy, San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child with Angela: National Gallery, from a cartoon by the master, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child with St. John: marble tondo, Bargello, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child with St. John: marble tondo, Diploma Gallery, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna and Child with St. Joseph: painted tondo, Ufflzi, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna della Pietà: of St. Peter's <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg26">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Madonna: medallion at Genoa, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Maffei: the Most Reverend, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Malaspina: Lionardo, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Manfidi: Angelo, second herald, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mantegna: Andrea, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mantua, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mantua: Cardinal of, commends the Moses, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mantua: the Marchesana, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Marc Antonio Raimondi: his engraving of the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Marcello Venusti: his copy of the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Marcellus II.: <lb />
Pope, Cardinal Marcello Cervini, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>;<lb />
Pope, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Margarite: of Austria, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mario Scappuci, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>; <ref target="Pg181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Martin Schongauer: the master copies his engraving, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Masaccio: study of, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Maso del Bosco: carves the portrait of Julius II. for the Tomb, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Matilda: Countess, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mattea da Lecce: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Matthew: St., marble statue in the Court of the Academy, Florence, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Maturino: worked from the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Maximilian: Emperor, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medal: Leone's, of the master, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: Alessandro de', <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: Cardinal de', <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Clement VII.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: Cosimo de' <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: Cosimo de', First Grand Duke of Tuscany, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="342" /><anchor id="Pg342" />Medici Garden, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: House of, driven out of Florence, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: <lb />
Lorenzo di Pier Francesco de', <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;<lb />
letter to, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: <lb />
Lorenzo de', the Magnificent, sees the master at work in his garden, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;<lb />
takes him into his household, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>;<lb />
death, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>;<lb />
his ghost appears to Cardiere, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref>, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici: Pier de', <ref target="Pg15">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici rule, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Medici Tombs: in the New Sacristy of San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Melozzo da Forli: vault painting of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Menichella: Domenico, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Metauro, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Metello Vari: dei Porcari, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Michael Angelo: <lb />
claims descent from the House of Canossa, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>;<lb />
his ancestors, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>;<lb />
birth and horoscope, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref>;<lb />
foster-mother and schoolmaster, <ref target="Pg6">6</ref>;<lb />
first painting, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;<lb />
apprenticed to Ghirlandaio, <ref target="Pg8">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;<lb />
drawings, <ref target="Pg8">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>;<lb />
studies in the Medici Gardens under Bertoldo, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref>; <lb />
carves the head of a faun, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>;<lb />
enters the House of Medici, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>;<lb />
halcyon days with Lorenzo who presents him with a violet-coloured mantle, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>, note, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>;<lb />
incited by Poliziano, he carves the Rape of Deianira, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>;<lb />
grief at the loss of his patron, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>;<lb />
the lost Hercules, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>;<lb />
makes a snow-statue for Piero, <ref target="Pg15">15</ref>;<lb />
studies anatomy at Santo Spirito and carves a crucifix in wood for the Prior, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;<lb />
fears of Cardiere, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref>;<lb />
and flight to Bologna, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref>;<lb />
the Angel of the Shrine of San Domenico, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>;<lb />
returns to Florence, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;<lb />
the San Giovannino and the god of Love, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;<lb />
first visit to Rome, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;<lb />
carves a Bacchus and a little Cupid, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;<lb />
and the Madonna della Pietà, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>;<lb />
returns to Florence, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>-<ref target="Pg120">120</ref>;<lb />
the Madonna of Bruges, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>;<lb />
the three Tondi, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>-<ref target="Pg124">124</ref>;<lb />
the Cartoon of Pisa, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg38">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>-<ref target="Pg127">127</ref>;<lb />
summoned to Rome by Julius II., <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>;<lb />
who orders the Tomb, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>-34, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>-<ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
marbles brought from Carrara, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>;<lb />
flight from Rome, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg36">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
works in Florence on the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
joins Julius at Bologna, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>;<lb />
the Colossal Bronze, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>-<ref target="Pg142">142</ref>, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>;<lb />
returns to Florence, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>;<lb />
but is summoned to Rome, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>;<lb />
to paint the vault of the Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>-49, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>-<ref target="Pg165">165</ref>; <lb />
descriptions of the vault, <ref target="Pg42">42</ref>-46, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>-<ref target="Pg179">179</ref>;<lb />
death of Julius, <ref target="Pg50">50</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>;<lb />
proceeds with the Tomb, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>-<ref target="Pg182">182</ref>;<lb />
but Leo X. orders a facade for San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>;<lb />
quarries at Carrara and Pietra Santa, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
the facade abandoned, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
the Library, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>;<lb />
the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>;<lb />
and the Medici Tombs, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>-60, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>-<ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>-<ref target="Pg216">216</ref>;<lb />
the Siege of Florence, the master made Commissary-General of Fortifications, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>-58;<lb />
visits Ferrara, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>;<lb />
flight to Venice, <ref target="Pg66">66</ref>;<lb />
return to duty, <ref target="Pg57">57</ref>;<lb />
the fall of Florence, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>;<lb />
the master in hiding, but he is allowed to return to work on the Tombs, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>;<lb />
the Leda, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;<lb />
the Risen Christ, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>;<lb />
new agreement with the executors of Julius, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>-64, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>;<lb />
the master is called to Rome by Clement VII. and leaves Florence for the last time, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;<lb />
the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg64">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>-<ref target="Pg224">224</ref>;<lb />
Paul III. appoints the master chief architect, sculptor, and painter to the Vatican, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>;<lb />
the Tomb of Julius erected in San Pietro ad Vincula, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>-69, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>-<ref target="Pg227">227</ref>;<lb />
the frescoes in the Cappella Paolino, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>;<lb />
the Pietà of S.M. del Fiore, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>-<ref target="Pg237">237</ref>;<lb />
the cornice of the Farnese Palace, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>; <lb />
St. Peter's, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>;<lb />
the Brutus, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>;<lb />
S.M. degli Angeli, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>;<lb />
a grand-nephew born, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;<lb />
death of Urbino, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>;<lb />
a visit to the country near Spoleto, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>;<lb />
illness, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>;<lb />
death, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>;<lb />
works left in his house, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;<lb />
his body is deposited in SS. Apostoli, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>;<lb />
conveyed to Florence, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>;<lb />
and carried to Santa Croce, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>;<lb />
his imitators, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>;<lb />
character and endowments of the master, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;<lb />
his love of all beautiful things, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref>;<lb />
his abstemious life, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>;<lb />
generosity, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;<lb />
a description
<pb n="343" /><anchor id="Pg343" />of his person, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref>;<lb />
and the colour of his hair and eyes, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>;<lb />
the master visits S. Silvester, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>;<lb />
and expresses his opinion of the quiet life of work, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>;<lb />
of painting in Flanders, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>;<lb />
on drawing, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>-<ref target="Pg297">297</ref>, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>-<ref target="Pg322">322</ref>;<lb />
on working quickly or slowly, <ref target="Pg325">325</ref>;<lb />
on the value of paintings, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>;<lb />
on grotesque, <ref target="Pg316">316</ref>;<lb />
and on devotional painting, <ref target="Pg319">319</ref>.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Milan, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Milliarini: Professor, discovers a statue, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Minerva: the church of S.M. Sopra, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mini: Antonio, pupil of the master, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mini: Paolo, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Miniato: San, fortifications, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Minighella, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Monciatto: woodcarver, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Montanto: Antonio, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Montelupo, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Montevarchi: Ser Giovanni di Guasparre, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Montevecchio; Cardinal, <ref target="Pg63">63</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Montorsoli, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Moscheroni: Flemish merchants, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Moses: marble statue, the Tomb of Julius, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mother: of the Master, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Francesca <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mould on the Vault, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mozza: Via, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Nanni di Baccio Bigio: his intrigues, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Naples: copy of the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">National Gallery, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg330">330</ref>, <ref target="Pg331">331</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Neptune: proposed statue of Andrea Doria as, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Nero, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref>, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">New Sacristy of San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Nicholas V.: Pope, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Nicolo di Bari: the ark of San Domenico, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Nicolo: San, beyond Arno, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Night: marble statue, New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg213">213</ref>, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Noah: the Sacrifice of, Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Novella: S.M., the first art school of the master, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Oil painting; the master's opinion of <ref target="Pg217">217</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ollanda: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Francesco<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Onofrio: San, the master's workshop at, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Operai: of the Duomo, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Orcagna, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Orvieto, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ottavio Farnese: the marriage of, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ovid, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>          <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Oxford: <lb />
drawings at, anatomy students, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;<lb />
after two destroyed frescoes, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;<lb />
design for alterations at San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Padua, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Palla: Giovanni Battista della, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paolina: Cappella, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paolo Galli: owned the Bacchus and the little Cupid, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paris: the Leda goes to, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Parma, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Parmigiano, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paul: St., conversion of, fresco, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paul III.: <lb />
Pope, elected, <ref target="Pg66">66</ref>;<lb />
visits the master, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>;<lb />
orders him to proceed with the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref>;<lb />
appoints the master chief architect, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>;<lb />
his answer to Messer Biagio, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>;<lb />
orders the frescoes for his chapel, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref>; <lb />
death, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Paul IV.: Pope, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pavia: Cardinal of, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Penseroso: Il, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Perino del Vaga, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Perspective, <ref target="Pg82">82</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Perugino, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Peruzzi: Baldassari, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pesaro, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pescara: Marchioness of, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Colonna<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pesellino: studies from, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Peter: St., a blocked out statue, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Peter: St., crucifixion of, alfresco, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Peter's: <lb />
the church of St., new design for, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref>;<lb />
plans altered to embrace the project of the Tomb, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;<lb />
the master undertakes the works,

<pb n="344" /><anchor id="Pg344" /> <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg243">243</ref>, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Petrarca, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>;<lb />
and Tuscan rhyme, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Petronilla: Santa, the Madonna della Pietà placed in the church of, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Petronio: San, a marble statuette finished by the master, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Petronio: San, the master hears mass in the church of, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Phæton: a drawing, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Phidias, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Piacenza: the ferry revenue goes to the master, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Piecolomini: Cardinal Francesco, orders fifteen statues, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pico della Mirandola, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pier Luigi: Gaeta, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Piero di Cosimo, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, note, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pierre Mariette: the fate of the Leda, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietà: a drawing, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietà: of S.M. del Fiore, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietà: the Palazzo Rondini, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietà: Viterbo, by Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietà: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Madonna della Pietà<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietra: Santa, marble quarries, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg53">53</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>-<ref target="Pg185">185</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro Matteo d'Amelia, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro: San, in Montorio, wall painting by Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro: San, in Viticula, the Tomb of Julius II. set up, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro: San, Maggiore, Florence, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro Urbano: a workman, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pietro Urbino, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pilote: goldsmith, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pinti: Borgo, the master's house in, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pintoricchio: Bernardino, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Piombo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Sebastiano<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pisa: <lb />
fortifications, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;<lb />
picture by Buggiardini, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>; <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pisa: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Cartoon<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pisani: pulpits of the, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pisano: Giovanni, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pistoia: San Andrea at, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pitti: Bartolomineo, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pius III.: Pope, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Piccolomini.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pius IV.: <lb />
Pope, elected, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>; <lb />
confirms the master in his office, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pius V.: injures the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Plato, <ref target="Pg75">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Plutarch, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>, <ref target="Pg326">326</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Po: <lb />
the river, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>; <lb />
revenue of a ferry, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Poggibonsi, <ref target="Pg35">35</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pole: Cardinal, a friend of the master, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Polidoro, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Poliziano: recognises the master's lofty spirit, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pollaiuolo: Salvestro del, nephew of Antonio, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pollaiuolo: Simone il, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Polvaccio: Roman quarry, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pompey, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ponte: Maestro Bernardo dal, helps to cast the Colossal Bronze, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ponte Rotto, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pontormo: Il, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Porta del Popolo, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Porta Pia, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Portraits of the master, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Praxiteles, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Prophets: Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg42">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>-<ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>-<ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Protogenes, <ref target="Pg325">325</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Psyche: the Story of, by Raphael, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pulci: Luigi, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Raffaellino: offers to come as assistant, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Raffaello da Monte Lupo: <lb />
his autobiography, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>;<lb />
the Madonna for the Tomb of Julius, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>-<ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Raising of Lazarus: by Sebastiano, the master's design for, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Raphael: <lb />
da Urbino, proposed by the master as painter of the Sistine, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>, <ref target="Pg47">47</ref>;<lb />
studies the style of the master, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;<lb />
he is praised by the master, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;<lb />
his painting of Doni, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>;<lb />
studied the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;<lb />
his manner with his assistants, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>;<lb />
the proposition of Bramante, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;<lb />
cartoons for tapestry, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>;<lb />
his composition of the Sacrifice of Noah, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>;<lb />
Sibyls at S.M. della Pace, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>;<lb />
a putto, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ravenna, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Realdo: physician, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Redemptions of Israel, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Reggio, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rembrandt, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Reynel: King of France, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Riccio: Luigi del, nurses the master when ill, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>


<p rend="text-indent: 0"><pb n="345" /><anchor id="Pg345" />Ricordi: <lb />
the vault finished, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;<lb />
the facade of San Lorenzo abandoned, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
marbles for the sacristy, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>; <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>;<lb />
Gondi hides goods in the New Sacristy, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ridolfi: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ridolfo Pio of Carpi: <lb />
Cardinal, letter to, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;<lb />
the Brutus for, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ridolfo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Ghirlandaio<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rimini: a post on the Chancery bestowed on the master, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Risen Christ: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Christ<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Robertet: Florimond, secretary, receives the bronze David, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rocco: a San, drawn for Minighella, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rondini: Palazzo, Pietà in, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rontini: Baccio, cures the master from the effects of his fall, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Romans: claim him as a citizen, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rome: <lb />
the master's first visit, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref> <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>7, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref> <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;<lb />
the sack of, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;<lb />
the master returns finally, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rosselli: Cosimo, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rosselli: Piero di Jacopo, plasters the vault, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rosselli: Pietro, letter to the master, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rosselmini: Count Guarlandi, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rosso: II, worked from the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rovere: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Julius II.<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rovezzano: Benedetto da, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rovano: Cardinal, <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Dionigi<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Royal Academy: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Diploma Gallery<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Rucellai: recommendation to, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ruffilni: Alessandro, groom of the Chamber, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sacrarium: at San Lorenzo, design, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sacrifice of Noah, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sacristy of San Lorenzo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Medici Tombs<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sack of Rome, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salt-cellar: design for, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salvestro da Montanto, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salvestro: jeweller, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salviati: Alamano, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salviati: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salviati: Cecchino, rescues fragments of the arm of the David, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salviati: Michael Angelo, father of Cecchino, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Salviati: Jacopo, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sanazzaro, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sangallo; Antonio da, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg47">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>-<ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sangallo: Aristotele, assistant, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sangallo: Ginliano da, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">San Gallo: Porta, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sansovino: Andrea del Monte a, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sansovino: Jacopo, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Santa Croce: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Santa Croce: Florence, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>-<ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Santarelli: sculptor, discovers a statue, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Santiquattro: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sarto: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Andrea<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Savonarola: <lb />
the master's affection for, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref>; <lb />
his sermons, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Scaffolding: <lb />
designed by the master, <ref target="Pg82">82</ref>;<lb />
drawing of, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>; <lb />
fall from, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Schongauer: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Martin Scipio, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Scourging of Christ: drawn for Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sebastiano del Piombo, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>: <lb />
a walk in Rome, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>;<lb />
letters from, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;<lb />
portrait of Doria, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>;<lb />
letter to, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;<lb />
prepares the wall for the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, note;<lb />
his genial humour, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;<lb />
designs for, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Setta Sangallesca, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>-<ref target="Pg245">245</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Settignano: the master nursed at, <ref target="Pg6">6</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sibyls, <ref target="Pg42">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>-<ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>-<ref target="Pg178">178</ref>;<lb />
by Raphael, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Siege of Florence, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Siena, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sigismondo: a brother, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Signorelli: <lb />
Luca, pictures in the Uffizi, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>;<lb />
and Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;<lb />
slight influence of, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Silvester: San, at Monte Cavallo, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>-<ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Simone da Canossa: ancestor, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg6">6</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sin of Ham, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>-49, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>-<ref target="Pg180">180</ref>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sixtus IV.: Pope, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Slaves: the two, marble statues, given to Strozzi, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>; <ref target="Pg182">182</ref>, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Snow: a statue in, <ref target="Pg15">15</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Socrates, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Soderini: Cardinal, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Soderini: <lb />
Pier, Gonfaloniere, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg36">36</ref>, <pb n="346" /><anchor id="Pg346" /> <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;<lb />
his criticism of the David, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Solari: Cristoforo, Il Gobbo, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spain, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spanish Chapel, <ref target="Pg99">99</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spedalingo: head of the hospital of S.M. Nuova, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spina: <lb />
Giovanni, to pay a provision to the master, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>;<lb />
letter to, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spirito: Santo, a crucifix for, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Spoleto, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Staccoli: Hieronimo, his letter to the Duke of Camerino, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Stairway to the Library, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Stanze: of the Vatican, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Stefano: di Tomaso, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Strozzi: Filippo, a sword hilt given to, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Strozzi: Giovan Battista, verses on the Night, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Strozzi: Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Strozzi Palace: the Hercules there until the siege, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Strozzi: Roberto, Slaves given to, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Stufa: Luigi della, a colossus to spoil the front of his palace, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sword-hilt: designed for Aldobrandini but given to Strozzi, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tapestry: Raphael's cartoons for, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tasio: wood-carver, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Taro: river, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tè: Palazzo del, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Teridade: King, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Terribilità: the master's, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Teyler Museum: Haarlem, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tiber, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tiberio Calcagni, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>;<lb />
letter to Lionardo, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ticino: river, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Titian: his later work, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tityos: drawing, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tolemei: Claudio, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tomaso: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Cavalieri<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tomaso: of Prato, attorney, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tomb of Julius: <lb />
first design, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>-33, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;<lb />
description, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>;<lb />
moneys received for, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>;<lb />
the master's desire to complete it, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>;<lb />
and trouble concerning it, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tondi: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Madonna and Child<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Topolino: Domenico Fancelli, letter to, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Torrigiano: <lb />
strikes the master, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref>;<lb />
his history, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>;<lb />
a St. Francis by, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tribolo: studied the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Trinità de' Monti, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tromboncini: Bartolomeo, music to the madrigals, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Turk: The Grand, invites the master, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Uffizi: <lb />
Florence, the painted tondo, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>;<lb />
the dancing Faun, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>;<lb />
Signorelli's pictures <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>;<lb />
drawings, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Urbino: Francesco, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Urbino: <lb />
Francesco Maria, Duke of, finds fault with the slow progress of the Tomb of Julius II., <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>-64;<lb />
Paul III. arranges a new contract, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>;<lb />
final contract, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Urbino: the master thinks of retiring to, <ref target="Pg66">66</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Urbino: the Palace of the Duke, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valdarno, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valori: Baccio, the Apollo presented to, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valentino: Duke, sends the god of Love to Mantua, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valerio Cioli, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valerio de Vincença, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valpaio: Benvenuto, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Valuation of works of art, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vansitelli, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Varchi: <lb />
Lectures and criticisms on the sonnets, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>;<lb />
oration, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vari: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Metello<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vasari: <lb />
Giorgio, his famous book, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>;<lb />
preserves the broken fragments of the arm of the David, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>;<lb />
the story of the Gonfaloniere, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>;<lb />
the St. Matthew, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>;<lb />
the tondi, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>;<lb />
the Cartoon, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;<lb />
seventeen statues for the Tomb of Julius completed, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;<lb />
a list of assistants, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>;<lb />
his fable of the vault, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>;<lb />
the Apollo, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>;<lb />
he completes the works at San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>;<lb />
how Sebastiano prepared the wall, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>;<lb />
the master's fall, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref>;<lb />
the Day of Judgment, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>;<lb />
the Cappella Paolino, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>;<lb />
he sees the master<pb n="347" /><anchor id="Pg347" /> working at night, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>;<lb />
a Pietà, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>;<lb />
the cornice, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>;<lb />
St. Peter's, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;<lb />
plots, <ref target="Pg243">243</ref>;<lb />
the bridge of Nanni, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>;<lb />
the church for the Florentines in Rome, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>;<lb />
the medal of Leone, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>;<lb />
he holds another Buonarroto at the font, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>;<lb />
a letter to, referring to the death of Urbino, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>;<lb />
the master's will, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>;<lb />
he receives the master's body in Florence, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>;<lb />
and describes the opening of the coffin in Santa Croce, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>;<lb />
and the obsequies at San Lorenzo, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>;<lb />
he designs the Tomb, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>;<lb />
and enumerates the pupils, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vauban: studies the fortifications at San Miniato, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vault: <lb />
of the Sistine Chapel, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>-49;<lb />
works begun, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>;<lb />
painting begins, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>;<lb />
assistants dismissed, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>;<lb />
mould on the fresco, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>;<lb />
exposed to view, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>;<lb />
finished, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;<lb />
a description, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>-<ref target="Pg179">179</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vecchio: <lb />
Palazzo, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>;<lb />
cartoon for, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>;<lb />
Bandinelli's Hercules and Cacus, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Venice: <lb />
the master invited to, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>;<lb />
flees to, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;<lb />
Sebastiano refers to, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Venusti: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Marcello<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Victory: the, a marble statue in the Bargello, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vincenzo: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Borghini<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vinci: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Lionardo<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vincula: <lb />
San Pietro in, Bramante's work needs support, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;<lb />
the Moses placed in, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref><lb />
Virgil, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref>, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vitelli: Alessandro, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Viterbo: <lb />
Vittoria Colonna visits, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>;<lb />
the Pietà by Sebastiano, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vitruvius, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vittoria: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Colonna<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Volterra: Cardinal, letter from Soderini to, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Volterra: <hi rend="font-style: italic">see</hi> Daniele<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Windsor: drawings, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Works of art in the house of the master when he died, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Zanobi: Via San, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Zanobi: Mona, land near her estate, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Zapata: Diogo, <ref target="Pg289">289</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Zeuxis, <ref target="Pg315">315</ref><lb /></p>

</div>

<div>
<p rend="text-indent: 0">Printed by <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ballantyne, Hanson &amp; Co.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">London &amp; Edinburgh</p>

</div>

</body>

<back>

<div>
<divGen type="footnotes" rend="page-break-before: right" />
</div>

<div>
<divGen type="pgfooter" rend="page-break-before: always" />
</div>

</back>

</text>

</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19332-tei.tei.  and 19332-tei.zip

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


 http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/3/3/19332/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


 This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
 almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
 or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
 included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

 - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
  already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
  the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
  donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
  days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
  required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
  should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
  “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
  Archive Foundation.”

 - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
  You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
  works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
  all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

 - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section 2.


   Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


 Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


 Dr. Gregory B. Newby
 Chief Executive and Director
 gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


 Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
        Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


  General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


 http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
